How To Cook The Fragmented Rug Pull?
Minh Trung Tran†, Nasrin Sohrabi‡, Zahir Tari†, Qin Wang§
†RMIT University | ‡Deakin University | §CSIRO’s Data61, Australia
Abstract—Existing rug pull detectors assume a simple work-
flow: the deployer keeps liquidity pool (LP) tokens and per-
forms one or a few large sells (within a day) that collapse the
pool and cash out. In practice, however, many real-world exits
violate these assumptions by splitting the attack across both
time and actor dimensions: attackers break total extraction
into many low-impact trades and route proceeds through
multiple non-owner addresses, producing low-visibility drains.
We formalize this family of attacks as the fragmented rug
pull (FRP) and offer a compact “recipe” for a slow-stewed
beef special: (i) keep the lid on (to preserve LP control so
on-chain extraction remains feasible); (ii) chop thin slices (to
split the total exit volume into many low-impact micro-trades
that individually fall below impact thresholds); and (iii) pass
the ladle (to delegate sells across multiple wallets so that each
participant takes a small share of the extraction). Technically,
we define three atomic predicate groups and show that their
orthogonal combinations yield evasive strategies overlooked by
prior heuristics (USENIX Sec’19, USENIX Sec’23).
We validate the model with large-scale measurements. Our
corpus contains 303,614 deployed LPs (block ranging from
Nov. 2, 2018 to Mar. 5, 2025), among which 105,434 are labeled
as FRP pools. The labeled subset includes 34,192,767 pool-
related transactions and 401,838 inflated-seller wallets, involv-
ing 1,501,408 unique interacting addresses. Notably, owner-
wallet participation in inflated selling among FRP-flagged
liquidity pools has declined substantially (≈33.1% of cases),
indicating a shift in scam behavior: the liquidity drain is no
longer held on the owner wallet. Additionally, we detected
127,252 wallets acting as serial scammers when repeatedly
engaging in inflated selling across multiple FRP LPs. Our
empirical findings demonstrate that the evasive strategies we
define are widespread and operationally significant.
1. Introduction
Ethereum underpins the majority of decentralized fi-
nance (DeFi) [1] activity, with approximately 70% of the
total value locked (TVL) across all blockchains [2]. Rug pull
scams [3] remain among the most destructive attack vectors
in this ecosystem, leading to annual losses amounting to
more than $2B USD [4].
A typical rug pull follows a simple pattern. (i) The de-
ployer first launches a new token and establishes a liquidity
pool on a decentralized exchange, usually pairing the token
with a well-recognized base asset such as ETH or USDT to
create an illusion of legitimacy and attract early liquidity.
(ii) They then supply an initial amount of both assets to
bootstrap trading activity and adjust pool parameters to
appear stable and liquid. Once the pool is live, the de-
ployer engages in aggressive marketing through social media
announcements, airdrops, and influencer endorsements to
stimulate speculative demand and drive token purchases
from unsuspecting investors. As more participants join, the
token’s market valueincreasese, masking the asymmetry of
control retained by the deployer over the liquidity provider
(LP) tokens. (iii) At the moment the liquidity peak, the
attacker executes the exit phase: selling large quantities of
the project token or directly withdrawing the LP tokens
to reclaim the base asset. The sudden extraction (usually
within one day) drains the pool’s reserves, causes the token’s
price to collapse, and leaves investors with unsellable assets,
marking the completion of the rug pull.
1.1. Why Existing Detection Fails?
Early measurement and forensic studies [3], [5] distilled
rug-pull behavior into simple operational heuristics (Figure
1(a)). Concretely, detectors raise alerts when two observable
conditions (we denote it as predictes to emphasize their
role as a family of structurally similar logical elements) co-
occur: (i) a large sell or withdrawal that sharply reduces pool
liquidity (impact), and (ii) the transaction’s sender is the
token owner or LP deployer (identity). These impact- and
identity-based rules underpin both academic and commercial
detectors and have long served as effective first-order signals
for classic, one-shot exits.
However, attackers adapted faster than the heuristics.
Our reanalysis of on-chain incidents since 2021 (§3)
shows a clear shift in operational patterns: instead of a
single, high-impact owner sell, adversaries increasingly split
extraction into many smaller trades and route them through
non-owner addresses.
The aggregate economic effect is
the same, yet no single transaction violates the legacy per-
transaction checks; consequently, many confirmed scams no
longer exhibit the textbook single large owner sell signature
relied upon by rule-based detectors. This structural diver-
gence produces a blind spot: pools are drained economically
like rug pulls, but remain invisible to static heuristics.
The root cause is fundamental: existing heuristics encode
an observable symptom (a conspicuous transaction) rather
than the underlying economic gap (that the attacker can
extract value). Once adversaries know the fixed triggers,
evasion is straightforward: change who sells, reduce per-
transaction volume, or alter timing.
arXiv:2511.15463v1  [cs.CR]  19 Nov 2025


(a) Traditional rug pull heuristic detection relies on three conditions (i.e.,
Predicates A-C). If all three hold, the pool is flagged as a rug pull. However,
we find that B and C are modifiable and can be further generalized!
(b) Our extended FRP heuristic generalizes (B) and (C) into dynamic,
multi-actor observables to capture both impact fragmentation (splitting exits
into low-impact fragments) and identity delegation (distributing sells across
multiple non-owner addresses). These extensions can bypass existing static
heuristics and motivate our on-chain measurement of predicate-level evasions.
Figure 1: Fragmented Rug Pull
A recent study [6] extended detection into the temporal
dimension, reporting the emergence of slow liquidity drain
(SLID) scams where attackers siphon funds gradually rather
than through a single abrupt exit. While SLID effectively
lowered the detection threshold by monitoring liquidity loss
over extended periods, its analysis remains only temporal,
without revealing how attackers alter the underlying detec-
tion logic or predicate conditions.
What is still missing is a principled understanding of
which predicate-level modifications preserve the attacker’s
payoff, and how frequently such evasive variants appear
in the wild. Addressing these gaps motivates our formal
decomposition of rug-pull heuristics into atomic predicates.
1.2. Our Efforts
We progress by identifying and addressing a series of
research questions (RQs):
• RQ1: Which canonical heuristic components of rug pulls
are brittle under adversarial modification?
Traditional rug-pull detection relies on a small set of
hand-crafted behavioral rules to flag high-impact, owner-
originated liquidity exits. However, prior studies lack a
formal decomposition of these heuristics into elementary
predicates and overlook which parts can be adversarially
modified without reducing the attacker’s economic return.
To fill this gap, we revisit canonical detection logic and
express it as a minimal set of measurable predicates covering
three behavioral dimensions: (A) liquidity-pool control, (B)
splitting large exits (keeping each order’s impact below
a threshold), and (C) identity obfuscation via multi-wallet
execution. Through theoretical analysis, we identify which
predicates can be modified without lowering attacker payoff,
providing the first principled proof of heuristic brittleness.
This predicate-level view reveals two core evasive op-
erations aligned with (B) and (C): (i) splitting large exits
into many low-impact orders, and (ii) delegating execution
across multiple wallets to conceal ownership.
A complementary tactic is to schedule trades over time
(temporal smoothing, as explored in [6]) to further dilute
observable signals, though this acts as an overlay on (B)/(C)
rather than a standalone predicate.
• RQ2: How can these evasive modifications be formally
modeled to define and generalize a new scam type?
Building on the above predicate analysis, we formalize a
new class of evasive scams and, termed the Fragmented Rug
Pull (FRP), to systematically exploit heuristic brittleness.
Definition 1 (Fragmented rug pull (FRP), informal
sketch). A fragmented rug pull is an exit strategy in which
the attacker preserves liquidity-pool control (Predicate A)
while extracting value by (i) splitting large exits so that each
order remains below the impact threshold (Predicate B),
and (ii) obfuscating identity by delegating execution across
multiple wallets (Predicate C), ensuring that no single trans-
action or address triggers canonical rug-pull heuristics.
Formally, FRP behavior can be characterized by three
independent parameters: (i) the number of selling wallets
(N), (ii) the per-wallet order count (Ka), and (iii) the per-
order impact (v), subject to the invariant that each order’s
impact satisfies v < θ (the canonical impact threshold) and
that ownership signals are dispersed across wallets so that
no single owner exhibits a heuristic-triggering footprint.
Our model unifies evasive behaviors under a single
analytical framework, making FRPs quantifiable and com-
parable to traditional rug pulls. We show more in §4.
• RQ3: How prevalent are these fragmented rug pulls in
real-world DEX environments?
To answer this, we perform a large-scale on-chain mea-
surement covering six major Ethereum DEXs (Uniswap,
SushiSwap, Balancer, Curve, PancakeSwap, and Bancor-
Swap) from November 2018 to March 2025. Among
384,029 liquidity pools and over 1.1 billion transactions,
303,614 short-lived pools (lifetime ≤100 days) were re-
tained for analysis.
Applying our predicate-based FRP definition, we iden-
tify 105,434 pools (34.7%) as fragmented rug pulls, involv-
ing 34.19M transactions, 401,838 inflated-seller wallets, and
1.50M unique interacting addresses.
We find that fragmented rug pulls have rapidly become
a mainstream scam pattern in DeFi. Their presence was
negligible before 2020 (fewer than one hundred cases were
observed) but grew explosively with the rise of decentralized
trading, reaching nearly 40k detected pools in 2023.
Our measurement further shows a clear shift in how
attackers operate. Traditional single-wallet exits are steadily
disappearing (from 57% in 2019 to 28.3% in 2024), while


multi-wallet schemes have become the norm—over 70% of
FRPs now involve coordinated actions from a few sellers
rather than one. Owner participation has dropped from
65% to 24%, showing that deployers increasingly rely on
delegated wallets to hide their identity. Single-wallet scams
finish within a couple of days and involve only a handful of
sells, whereas multi-wallet schemes stretch over a week with
dozens of small trades that mimic normal market activity.
Our contributions, in short, are
•
predicate decomposition of rug pulls;
•
new definition of fragmented rug pull scam;
•
formal detection model as extended heuristics;
•
large-scale on-chain measurement within Ethereum.
Beyond modeling and measurement, we further con-
structed and released1 our labeled pool dataset [7], predi-
cate evaluations, and analysis scripts to support reproducibil-
ity and future comparative studies [8].
We also summarized practical indicators that can serve
as early warning signals for emerging scams, such as the
creation of multiple distributor wallets shortly after deploy-
ment, synchronized low-impact sell patterns, and rapid post-
exit fund consolidation. We hope that our open resources can
facilitate the future on-chain fraud detectors that reason over
aggregated behaviors rather than isolated events.
2. Technical Warm-Ups
2.1. Ethereum Token and Account model
We review three technical facts that enable fragmented
exit strategies: (i) ERC-20’s interface permits programmatic
transfer of value across heterogeneous addresses; (ii) ap-
proval and minting / pre-funding functions make bulk dis-
tribution and inflated selling operationally feasible; and (iii)
the combined use of EOAs and contract yields multi-address
flows that evade single-transaction heuristics.
ERC-20. Ethereum’s fungible token implements the ERC-
20 standard [9], which defines a uniform transfer and
approval APIs and emits transfer events. This improves
composability across DEXs, bridges, and lending protocols,
but the identical call patterns can be leveraged by attackers.
approve/transferFrom enables pre-authorised token
transfer by third parties or contracts, enabling automated dis-
tribution from one source to many intermediary addresses.
Token contracts that allow mint make pre-funding and in-
flated balances possible, supporting large downstream sells
without immediate owner-originated buys.
EOAs, contracts, and internal transfers. Ethereum distin-
guishes Externally Owned Accounts (EOAs) and Contract
Accounts [10], [11]. Contracts can programmatically split,
route, and synchronize transfers (including multi-hop calls),
producing multiple internal transfers under a single external
tx hash. The result is multi-address fund flows that are
difficult to flag using per-transaction heuristics.
1. Accessible via https://anonymous.4open.science/r/FRP source-730C
2.2. Decentralized Exchanges and Liquidity Pools
Decentralized exchanges. DEXs form the backbone of the
DeFi ecosystem, enabling users to trade assets directly from
their wallets. Uniswap [12], the largest DEX on Ethereum,
exemplifies this model. Unlike centralized exchanges that
hold user assets, DEXs execute trades on-chain through
automated market makers (AMMs) [13]. Each AMM gov-
erns a liquidity pool (LP). LP is a reserve of token pairs
priced continuously by an invariant function. LP allows
permissionless trading without intermediaries.
Liquidity pool. An LP typically holds a base token (e.g.,
ETH, USDT, USDC, DAI) and a paired token, often a newly
issued asset. The pool creator deposits both to initialize the
price. Most DEXs adopt the constant-product model [14],
[15], x · y = k, where x and y denote token reserves and
k is constant. This design ensures continuous liquidity but
induces price slippage: larger trades cause proportionally
higher price impact.
Users interact with LPs through deposits, withdrawals,
and swaps, all recorded on-chain. Buying the paired token
increases the base-token reserve and raises its price; selling
does the opposite. Any participant may also provide liquidity
by depositing both tokens, receiving LP tokens as proof of
ownership and later redeeming them for their share.
Control over LP tokens determines control over the
pool’s liquidity. If deployers retain these tokens, they can
later withdraw reserves. Legitimate projects burn or lock
LP tokens [1], [12], [16], [17] to prevent such withdrawals
and signal credibility. In contrast, scammers typically avoid
or falsify this step, preserving withdrawal rights while dis-
guising future liquidity drains as normal trading activity.
2.3. Withdraw vs. Selling in Rug Pull
A rug pull is an LP-based exit scam in which an at-
tacker converts pool-held value into base assets, leaving the
remaining investors with devalued tokens [3], [5].
In practice, rug pull scammers employ two economically
equivalent extraction preferences:
• Withdraw. The deployer redeems unburned LP tokens to
remove liquidity directly from the pool after users add
value by buying the paired token. A single withdrawal
can drain most of the base-token reserves in one atomic
action, triggering an abrupt price collapse and producing
an unmistakable owner-originated trace on-chain.
• (Inflated) selling. The attacker sells an inflated supply of
the paired token into the pool to extract base tokens indi-
rectly. Large, concentrated sells deplete reserves through
price slippage, while repeated or coordinated sells can
achieve the same depletion effect as a direct withdrawal.
When the total value recovered from withdrawals or
inflated sells exceeds the attacker’s initial stake (after fees
and slippage [3], [5], [6]), the attacker gains a profit. Heuris-
tic detectors identify rug pulls by flagging abrupt owner
withdrawals or high-impact sell actions [18], [19].
Throughout this paper, selling by scam wallets refers to
this inflated selling, not routine trading behavior.


3. Motivational Examples
We revisit concrete on-chain incidents. Each case results
in a similar outcome: a near-total liquidity collapse. But they
exit in different ways and evade automated flagging.
Case study on LIBRA. LIBRA is one of the biggest
cryptocurrency scams [20] so far. It reached over $5 billion
in token value just a few hours after launch.
The deployer retained control of the initial liquidity
tokens yet performed no large or visible owner sells. Instead,
the exit happened through four new wallets created within
one hour of deployment. Each wallet made only a few
medium-sized (two - five) sells. Every sell stayed below the
usual detection limit (θ ≈0.9) used by prior tools [3], [5].
Small buy orders and private-bundled trades were mixed in
to hide price changes.
LIBRA caused the same results as a regular rug pull
and avoided triggering any known rug pull heuristics.
No owner transaction exceeded the impact threshold and
per-transaction impact metrics remained within “normal”
volatility ranges. Automated detectors marked the pool as
normal, and the scam went unnoticed for days. LIBRA was
ultimately identified only through secondary signals (off-
chain alerts and owner self-confession on intentional scam
purpose) rather than the canonical on-chain heuristics.
Additional cases. Safereum [21] and ZhongHua [22] used
similar evasion strategies with slightly different methods.
Safereum deployed about a dozen pre-funded wallets. Each
wallet made a short series of small sells mixed with normal-
looking trades. The profits were then sent to one shared
wallet and later bridged out. ZhongHua took a different
approach. It used a proxy contract to make timed sells
through delegated EOAs while the main deployer stayed
inactive, giving the illusion of independent traders. Both
cases were later confirmed as scams by independent on-
chain investigation platforms and community security track-
ers. Specifically, Safereum was flagged by multiple analytics
aggregators for coordinated multi-wallet drains by Certik,
while ZhongHua was reported through cross-chain tracing
that linked one of the inflated selling addresses to another
group of identified scam wallets.
Beyond these two, we analyzed more liquidity pools
showing the same pattern: fragmented exits, multiple sell-
ing wallets, and no large sells from the owner. Each case
produced the same invisible outcome as LIBRA (details
in [23]).
In all examples, no single sell exceeded the detection
threshold or came directly from the deployer’s wallet. As a
result, existing automated detectors missed all of them.
4. Formalizing Fragmented Rug Pull
Our motivational examples show that existing detectors
can be evaded in practice. To investigate this gap, we
decompose the canonical rug-pull heuristic into elemental
predicates and analyze which assumptions an attacker can
change without altering the scam’s economic payoff (e.g.,
LP control, per-transaction impact, seller identity).
We proceed in two coordinated steps:
• Formal decomposition. We formalize the baseline sell-
based heuristic as a small set of measurable atomic pred-
icates and express each predicate mathematically so its
dependence on per-transaction magnitude, actor identity,
and timing is explicit. Building on this formalization, we
specify an adversary model and a family of predicate-level
modifications (an attacker can apply, e.g., fragmenting
impact, delegating identity) that preserve the economic
outcome while aiming to evade detection.
• Empirical evaluation. We apply the formal FRP definition
to on-chain traces to label affected pools and quantify
predicate-level evasions. Our measurement includes (i)
actor-centric analysis (who performs drains: wallet dis-
tribution, owner participation, recurrence) and (ii) action-
centric analysis (how drains are executed: sell frequency,
fragmentation level, behavioral categories).
4.1. Sell-Based Rug Pull Predicates
Existing detectors [3], [5] identify rug pulls by searching
for large owner sells, LP burns/unlocks, and sharp liquidity
drawdowns as key behavioral signatures (demonstrated in
Figure 1(a)). We take this baseline as the foundation for
formalization.
Notation. Let P denote a DEX liquidity pool, and let
T = {t1, . . . , tn} be the time-ordered set of sell/withdraw
transactions that affect P. For each transaction ti where
ti ∈T, we define:
• ai: the effective actor that executes the pool-affecting ac-
tion in ti (the address initiating the swap or LP removal);
• τi: the timestamp of ti;
• si: the paired-token amount sold or withdrawn in ti;
• vi: the realized base-token value returned by the DEX to
ai in ti;
• Vi: the base-token value of the pool before ti.
Owner set. Let O denote the deployer or LP creator address.
Define O as the owner set used by baseline heuristics. In
its conservative form, O = {O}; it may be expanded to
include proxy or custodian addresses when such mappings
are identifiable.
Atomic predicates. We next formalize the basic conditions
(predicates) used in heuristic detection. These predicates
describe, respectively, LP ownership retention, transaction
impact magnitude, and ownership identity of the actor.
Impact(ti) ≜vi
Vi
,
SellerIsOwner(ti) ≜(ai ∈O),
RetainLP ≜¬burnLock(LPTinit),
where LPTinit denotes the initial LP tokens controlled by
the deployer, and burnLock(·) returns true if those tokens
were irreversibly burned or time-locked.
We define the predicates as below.


RetainLP.
(A)
∃ti ∈T : Impact(ti) > θ.
(B)
SellerIsOwner(ti).
(C)
Here, θ ∈(0, 1) denotes the threshold for a single-
transaction impact, commonly set to θ = 0.9 following prior
studies [3], [5].
Detection rule. The detector D flags P as a rug pull if:
D(P) = (A) ∧(B) ∧(C).
Predicate (A) ensures the deployer retains LP control;
(B) captures a large one-shot sell or withdrawal that signif-
icantly depletes liquidity; and (C) links that action to the
owner set.
An attacker can evade D by violating any one of these
predicates: (i) concealing LP control (e.g., by locking or
redistributing LP tokens), (ii) fragmenting exits so that no
individual Impact(ti) exceeds θ, or (iii) delegating drain-
ing transactions to non-owner addresses (ai /∈O). Such
predicate-level manipulations preserve the same economic
outcome while escaping heuristic detection.
Notably, in our empirical evaluation (§6.3), we further
vary θ from 0.7 to 0.95 to assess the sensitivity of the
baseline detector under different impact thresholds.
4.2. Applying Modifications to Adversaries
Having decomposed the canonical heuristic into its
atomic predicates (A)–(C), we now reason formally about
how an attacker can perturb these predicates while preserv-
ing the same payoff-extraction mechanism as a canonical
rug pull. This section enumerates feasible predicate-level
modifications that can transform an originally detectable
rug pull into an operationally equivalent, but heuristically
undetectable, variant.
We organize the analysis by predicate:
• modifications of Predicate (A): can LP-token ownership
be changed without losing payoff? (see §4.2.1)
• modifications of Predicate (B): how can impact-based
rules be bypassed by fragmentation? (see §4.2.2)
• modifications of Predicate (C): what identity obfuscations
make large sells appear non-owner originated? (§4.2.3)
4.2.1. Retaining LP control is necessary. Predicate (A)
requires the deployer to retain control of the initial LP
tokens (i.e., RetainLP). If the attacker irrevocably burns or
time-locks these tokens, they forfeit any on-chain capability
to withdraw or self-sell liquidity later; hence the canonical
extraction route disappears.
Let Π denote any extraction plan that violates (A) (e.g.,
burnLock(LPTinit) = true). Then for every realization of
Π the attacker’s on-chain return RΠ is strictly smaller than
the canonical return Rcanonical (which assumes retained LP
control). Formally,
RΠ < Rcanonical.
Consequently, realistic evasions aiming to produce an equiv-
alent economic outcome must preserve (A); strategic mod-
ifications therefore focus on predicates (B) and (C).
4.2.2. Per-transaction fragmentation. Predicate (B) trig-
gers an alert when at least one transaction ti ∈T satisfies
Impact(ti) = vi
Vi
> θ.
Under canonical assumptions, θ ≈0.9 represents a high-
impact sell or withdrawal that depletes most of the pool’s
reserves in a single action [3], [5]. The attacker can cir-
cumvent this predicate by dividing a large extraction into
multiple smaller fragments such that each individual trade
remains below the detection threshold.
Fragmentation principle. Let the attacker aim to extract
a total base-token value Vtotal from pool P. The attacker
chooses a partition of Vtotal into K fragments (v1, . . . , vK)
satisfying
∀j,
vj
Vj
≤θ.
Then no single transaction violates (B), yet the cumulative
proceeds PK
j=1 vj can approximate the same aggregate
withdrawal as the canonical rug pull. Operationally, this
strategy requires only that the attacker sequentially execute
K transactions rather than one, which is trivial to automate.
Economic feasibility. Fragmentation incurs additional trans-
action fees and may suffer from compounding slippage. Let
slip(vj) denote the slippage cost for a trade of size vj, and
G the cumulative gas and relay fees across all fragments.
The attack remains profitable when
K
X
j=1
 vj −slip(vj)

−G ≥Vmin,
(1)
where Vmin is the attacker’s minimal acceptable return.
Because automated market maker (AMM) price curves are
convex [14], [15], marginal slippage increases superlinearly
with trade size; hence breaking a single large transaction
into multiple smaller ones can reduce per-trade price impact
faster than it raises total cost. This ensures that feasible
(K, G) pairs exist for many pools, especially when gas fees
are low and the attacker controls both sides of the swap.
Profit-satisficing fragmentation. Attackers may not insist
on achieving the exact canonical payoff. Instead, they can
adopt a satisficing approach of accepting a smaller but
positive profit to greatly reduce exposure. Formally, the
attacker selects K and {vj} such that each Impact(tj)≤θ
and inequality (1) holds for some modest Vmin > 0. This
approach balances profit and stealth: once net proceeds
exceed deployment and transaction costs, further extraction
only increases visibility and risk with diminishing marginal
gains.
Behavioral
rationale. Bounded-rational attackers often
“satisfice” rather than maximize profit [24]. From a
deterrence-theoretic view [25], expected utility declines as
detection probability rises; therefore, reducing transaction


amplitude while maintaining a positive return is a rational
choice. In practice, many real-world drains exhibit such
fragmentation patterns, which moderate in size, temporally
spaced, and collectively sufficient to yield net positive profit
after fees and slippage. Throughout this paper, we consider
a drain profitable once the attacker’s total recovered as-
set value exceeds initial capital and cumulative operational
costs, consistent with prior illicit-profit analyses [6].
4.2.3. Seller-identity obfuscation. Predicate (C) attributes
a large-impact transaction to the owner set O through the
predicate SellerIsOwner(ti) ⇔(ai ∈O). In the canonical
heuristic, a pool is flagged when a high-impact transaction
satisfies both Impact(ti) > θ and ai ∈O. Therefore, to
falsify (C), the attacker must ensure that all impactful sells
are executed by addresses outside of O.
Core idea. Identity obfuscation does not require crypto-
graphic anonymity; it only needs to break the on-chain link
between the deployer and the seller executing the drain.
The attacker can route exit transactions through a set of
distributor addresses A = {a(1), . . . , a(N)}, each distinct
from any O ∈O. Formally, the attacker enforces
∀ti ∈Texit,
ai /∈O.
From the detector’s viewpoint, this immediately falsifies
Predicate (C), since no large-impact trade originates from
an address known to be the deployer or owner.
Evasion design space. Seller-identity obfuscation can be
implemented across three increasing levels of sophistication:
• Direct delegation. The simplest form uses manually con-
trolled EOAs that receive temporary liquidity from the
owner, execute the sells, and return proceeds off-chain or
through private transfers. These addresses may be newly
generated (“fresh”) or pre-funded by the owner through
intermediary swaps.
• Proxy or contract-level delegation. A more robust variant
uses intermediate contracts that perform the selling on
behalf of the owner, e.g., minimal proxies, flash-loan
wrappers, or batch relays. Because the selling contract
address differs from O, the transaction is not labeled
as owner-originated even though the underlying control
remains centralized.
• Cross-wallet or cross-chain laundering. Sophisticated ac-
tors combine fragmentation and delegation by splitting
liquidity across chains or DEX instances, routing tokens
through bridges or mixers before reconvergence. This
dilutes both temporal and identity correlations, further re-
ducing the probability that any single address triggers (C).
Operational feasibility. Such identity-based evasions are
low-cost and easily automated. Creating or funding new
EOAs incurs negligible on-chain cost; gas overhead grows
linearly with the number of distributor addresses |A|, and
can be further amortized through batch transactions or re-
lays. The main coordination constraint is ensuring that the
cumulative exit volume across A satisfies
X
a(k)∈A
X
ti:ai=a(k)
vi = Vtotal,
while preserving Impact(ti) ≤θ for each fragment. When
combined with the fragmentation strategy of Predicate (B),
these constraints are easily met.
Stealth properties and forensic implications. Identity ob-
fuscation attacks degrade heuristic accuracy in two ways: (i)
they suppress direct owner–transaction associations required
by (C), and (ii) they increase the entropy of observable
addresses, forcing detectors to infer ownership indirectly
through behavioral clustering or timing analysis. Moreover,
when multiple distributors act in parallel, their combined
activity mimics organic market selling rather than a single
coordinated drain, further reducing detection confidence.
Beyond owner obfuscation. Attackers can also hide own-
ership semantically, e.g., transferring control to a DAO-
like [26], [27] multisig or locking LP tokens under a
timelock contract while simultaneously retaining trading
rights through a separate contract. In such cases, even
static ownership labeling (e.g., “contract deployed by O”)
becomes ambiguous, as legitimate DEX operations share
similar structures. We exclude such cases within this paper.
Finding (§4). Our formal decomposition highlights
that canonical rug-pull detectors rely on three brittle
predicates: LP control (A), high-impact sells (B), and
owner-originated activity (C). Among these, only (A) is
immutable for maintaining profitability. Predicates (B)
and (C) can be independently modified without reduc-
ing the scam’s payoff. By fragmenting exit volume (vi-
olating (B)) or delegating sells to non-owner addresses
(violating (C)), attackers can evade heuristic triggers
while retaining equivalent or satisficing profit.
4.3. Fragmented Rug Pull
Attackers in the wild combine the elementary variants
above into a single operational plan. These combinations
vary in engineering cost and stealth, but they all exploit the
same logical weakness of the canonical detector: the heuris-
tic looks for a small set of atomic signatures (mentioned as
(A), (B) and (C)). By composing perturbations, an attacker
can ensure that these 3 atomic checks cannot be simultane-
ously true while still realizing a profitable extraction.
Practically, an evasive exit is most naturally described
by three core, nested degrees of freedom:
• Number of seller wallets (N): the count of distribu-
tor/seller wallets that perform the inflated selling activity,
can range from 1 (a single distributor) to many.
• Per-wallet selling order count (Ka): for each seller a
among those N wallets, the number of sell orders exe-
cuted by a; each Ka can range from 0 to many (and only
1 sell from any of N is enough for a profitable result).
• Per-order volume (v): for every sell order in each Ka,
the order size may range from very small fragments up
to amounts approaching (but typically not exceeding) the
detector threshold θ, which is 0.9 based on [3].


Operationally, the attacker picks N distributor wallets,
assigns each a sequence of Ka orders, and chooses per-order
volumes v for those orders. Owner participation (whether
the deployer address O also sells/participates in the group of
inflated selling wallet N) is orthogonal to this construction:
it is a boolean side-choice that does not change the combina-
torial structure above. The simple invariant required to evade
owner+impact heuristics is that no large-impact transaction
is attributed to O (N = 1 and not owner, v ≥0.9 in any
Ka), beside that combination, the attacker is free to choose
any combination of N, Ka, and v based on their preference
and still be able to result in fraudulent profit.
From the above predicate analysis and how to break
them in heuristic (which is visualized in detail in Fig-
ure 1(b)), we present the formal definition of FRP scam.
Definition 2 (Fragmented rug pull (FRP)). An LP is
flagged as a fragmented rug rull (FRP) scam over the LP
lifetime of less than 100 days (§7.4) if the following hold:
①Control retention: burnLock(LPTinit) = false.
The deployer maintains full control over the initial
LP tokens.
②Fragmented inflated selling. There exists a set of
inflated seller(s) address A = {a1, . . . , aN} and,
for each a ∈A, a sequence of sell events Sa =
{(ta,1, va,1), . . . , (ta,Ka, va,Ka)} such that
∀a ∈A, ∀j ∈[Ka] :
Impact(ta,j) =
va,j
V(t−
a,j) ≤θ,
(Here Ka is the per-wallet order count)
③Non-owner wallet(s) execution. Either the owner
does not execute the impactful sells,
∀a ∈A : a ̸= O,
or, if the owner participates, every owner-originated
sell stays sub-threshold:
max
ti: ai=O Impact(ti) ≤θ.
(in the definition using in this research, we set the
θ = 0.9 as explained)
Using the above actions, we label a pool as FRP when
the deployer (i) retains LP-token control, while the extrac-
tion proceeds through either (ii) fragmented micro-trades
or (iii) delegated wallets, or both. The pool thus avoids
detection by canonical rug-pull heuristics, which rely on
single large-impact or owner-originated exits, yet achieves
the same economic outcome of draining the pool’s base-
token reserves over time.
4.4. Threat Model
We focus on detecting and characterizing FRPs using
only public on-chain data. In FRP games, two entities
exist: the adversary who performs the FRP, and defender,
represented by our measurement and detection pipeline.
Adversary. An adversary controls one or multiple externally
owned accounts and may also be the LP creator. Their
capabilities reflect real-world observations: they can (i) cre-
ate and seed liquidity pools, (ii) perform arbitrarily many
inflated-sell transactions, and (iii) distribute sells across mul-
tiple wallets, and (iv) choose flexible timing and sell-volume
patterns. All operations follow standard AMM semantics
and be recorded on-chain. The adversary cannot alter past
state, forge events, or hide sender addresses and timestamps.
The adversary aims to drain liquidity while avoiding
detection. To do so, they fragment exit volume, parallelize
execution across wallets, and modulate time spans.
Defender (our method). The defender represents our large-
scale detection pipeline, which observes only public on-
chain data: LP creation, liquidity changes, swap traces,
seller wallets, and timestamps. No private keys, off-chain
metadata, or centralized exchange information are assumed.
The defender’s role is to identify FRP-like patterns by
analyzing (i) the set of participating wallets, (ii) the tem-
poral structure and magnitude of inflated sells, and (iii) the
distribution of LPs across wallet-count and sell-count bins,
as formalized in Algorithm 1.
Detection scope. We restrict our model to AMM-based
liquidity exit behaviors. Contract exploits, phishing, off-
chain coordination, or oracle manipulation are outside scope.
Our analysis captures only FRP behaviors that are fully
observable through on-chain traces.
Finding-(§4.3): Aggregating the evasive predicates
yields a unified operational model of FRP. The model
captures all practical variations as combinations of
three execution parameters: number of seller wallets
(N), per-wallet order count (Ka), and per-order vol-
ume (v) with optional owner participation. The only
invariant needed to evade detection is the absence of
owner transaction with Impact > 0.9.
5. Large-Scale Measurement
We perform a large-scale empirical analysis of real-
world FRP activities (visualized in Figure 2). Firstly, we
use geth client and on-chain transaction API for LP data
collection and preprocessing (§5.1). Next, we apply the LP
dataset with FRP definition (§4.3) to systematically label
liquidity pools that satisfy the evasive predicates of impact
fragmentation and identity delegation (§5.1). Finally, we
conduct large-scale analysis on the flagged LPs (§5.2,§6).
5.1. Data Preparation
We construct a new dataset of confirmed scam pools,
where each entry corresponds to one P and contains its
complete transaction history from deployment to the final
observed transaction.
Data sources. We collect on-chain transactions from the six
largest DEXs on Ethereum: Uniswap [12], Balancer [28],


Figure 2: Overview of the research’s large-scale measurements process of FRP LPs on Ethereum
PancakeSwap [29], Curve Finance [30], BancorSwap [31]
and SushiSwap [32] using the Geth client node [33].
We first collect all Ethereum transactions from block
6,627,000 (Nov. 2, 2018, the date of the first LP deployment)
to block 21,379,910 (Mar. 5, 2025) using Geth client node
[33], and match them to LP deployment information using
Chainalysis API [34]. This yields a total of 384,029 liquidity
pools across six major DEXes with at least one recorded
activity within this range.
Pool filtering. For these 384,029 pools, we further retrieve
raw transaction data from a Geth archive node [33] and cat-
egorize all interactions into DEX-related activities (deploy,
buy, sell, deposit, withdraw). Following our definition in
§4.3, we retain only pools whose observable lifetime (from
first to last activity) does not exceed 100 days (details in
§7.4). After applying this filter, 303,614 LPs remain.
LP labeling. We label each pool as an FRP instance based
on the defined criteria. Applying this definition to the re-
maining 303,614 LPs, we identify 105,434 pools that match
the patterns specified by our heuristic.
Reproducibility. To support research transparency and con-
tribute for future research in experiment recreation, we
release all scripts, analysis notebooks, and all code used
in this study [8].
5.2. Dataset Analysis
We provide a brief review of our labelled FRP dataset.
TABLE 1: Collected data on Ethereum.
LPs
DEX Activities
DEXs
No. of pools
Order type
No. of Txs
Uniswap
376,854
SushiSwap
3,016
Deposit
13,990,620
Balancer
2,932
Withdraw
6,514,041
Curve
341
Buy
588,462,142
PancakeSwap
462
Sell
493,189,487
BancorSwap
424
Total
384,029
1,102,156,290
- Abbreviation: Tx: transaction; No.: number.
The dataset contains 105,434 LPs deployed between
2018 and 2024, with the number of detected cases rising
sharply after mid-2020. Figure 3(c) presents the yearly dis-
tribution in detail. FRP activity is negligible in 2018–2019
(only 4 and 76 LPs), but increases by an order of magnitude
with the expansion of DeFi after mid-2020: 8,195 LPs in
2020 and 8,524 in 2021. The growth accelerates further in
2022 (21,455) and peaks in 2023 (39,351). In Figure 3(c),
the LP counts stop in 2024 (27,829) without 2025 data
due to the partial observation window since our transaction
(data collected up to March 2025, which later-formed LPs
may not yet exhibit full exit behavior and lead to only
validated FRP with the latest created time of Dec 2024)
and an overall market slowdown [35]. Overall, over 90%
of labelled LPs appear after 2020, indicating that FRP is a
recent phenomenon concentrated in 2022–2024.
Across all labeled pools, we record 1,501,408 unique
users and 34,192,767 transactions. On average, each pool
interacts with 14.24 users and involves 324.30 transactions.
A total of 401,838 wallets are identified as inflated sellers,
representing 26.76% of all interacting addresses, meaning
more than one in four participants engage directly in manip-
ulative behavior. The average pool lifespan is 14.47 days.
The underlying distributions of those averages are highly
skewed: most pools are much smaller than the mean, while
a small number of large operations dominate total activity.
5.3. Implementations
To make our measurement pipeline transparent, we sum-
marize the end-to-end workflow in Algorithm 1.
Lines 1–14 extract the set of LPs labeled as FRP and
compute wallet-level properties such as the number of seller
wallets and whether the pool creator participates in inflated
sells. Lines 15–23 encode temporal and structural metrics
of the inflated-sell trace, enabling stratified comparisons
across single-wallet vs. multi-wallet and owner- vs. non-
owner cohorts. Lines 24–32 map each pool into wallet- and
sell-based bins, from which we derive the three behavioral
clusters (Minimal Drains, Moderate Networks, Distributed
Campaigns) reported in Figures 5–4(a) and Table 4.


Algorithm 1: Large-Scale Measurement on La-
beled FRP Pools
Data: LPInfoData, LPTransactionData
1 FRP_LPs ←LPInfoData.label == ’FRP’
2 /* select all LPs labeled as FRP */
3 Actor Centric Analysis(FRP_LPs,
LPTransactionData)
4 Action Centric Analysis(FRP_LPs,
LPTransactionData)
5 Behavior Categorization(FRP_LPs,
LPTransactionData)
6 Actor Centric Analysis (FRP_LPs,
LPTransactionData):
7
foreach P in FRP_LPs do
8
SP ←set of wallets with at least one inflated
sell in P
9
ownerInvolvedP ←(creator(P) ∈SP )
10
record |SP | and ownerInvolvedP
11
end
12
compute distribution of |SP | over all LPs
13
compute yearly trend of single- vs multi-wallet exits
14
compute yearly fraction of owner-involved LPs
15 Action Centric Analysis (FRP_LPs,
LPTransactionData):
16
foreach P in FRP_LPs do
17
TP ←ordered inflated-sell txs in P
18
∆t(P )
first ←time(first sell) −time(LP creation)
19
∆t(P )
span ←time(last sell) −time(first sell)
20
n(P )
sell ←|TP |
21
stratify metrics by cohorts: {single/multi-wallet,
owner/non-owner}
22
end
23
compute statistics used in Table 3
24 Behavior Categorization (FRP_LPs,
LPTransactionData):
25
foreach P in FRP_LPs do
26
w ←number of seller wallets in P
27
c ←total inflated-sell count in P
28
assign P to wallet-bin(w) and sell-bin(c)
29
end
30
compute share of LPs in each (wallet-bin, sell-bin)
31
label dominant behavior regions as: {Minimal
Drains, Moderate Networks, Distributed
Campaigns}
32
generate category summaries (Fig. 5, 4(b), 4(a),
Table 4)
6. Evaluation and Analyses
The labelled pools are examined from two complemen-
tary perspectives:
• Actor-centric analysis (§6.1) investigates who performs
the draining actions, quantifying wallet distribution, own-
ership participation, and their evolution over time.
• Action-centric analysis (§6.2) explores how draining is
executed by analyzing sell frequency, fragmentation lev-
els, and behavioral categories.
We then integrate these perspectives to reveal the aggre-
gate scale and temporal dynamics of FRPs (§6.3).
6.1. Actor-Centric Analysis
This analysis examines the actors behind FRP scam,
specifically, how many wallets participate in each drain,
what roles they play, and how profits are distributed among
them. By characterizing who performs the drain, we aim
to understand the attacker’s preferences, whether they in
general prefer relying on a single dominant wallet or in-
tentionally spread activity across many smaller addresses to
evade heuristic detection.
For each labelled pool, we collect all addresses that per-
form at least one inflated sell order. We then compare these
addresses with the deployer (owner) wallet and classify the
remaining sellers as delegated or external wallets. Finally,
we analyze the distribution of wallet counts across all pools.
Overall distribution. Across the full corpus, single-seller
drains remain the most common pattern when pools that
got inflated sell by only 1 seller account for 28.04% of all
labeled LPs (29,573 LPs). It is important to note that these
single-seller cases do not correspond to canonical rug-pulls:
by construction, all known rug-pull instances and high-
impact owner sells were excluded during data preparation
by applying FRP definition. Here, a “single-seller” FRP
simply denotes scams in which only one wallet executes
all inflated sells, yet the transaction(s) either remain below
the impact threshold (Predicate (B)) or originate from a non-
owner wallet (Predicate (C)).
Most FRP schemes still operate through small teams:
pools with inflated seller counts between 1 and 10 account
for 70.45% of all cases, totaling 74,287 LPs. The remaining
29.55% (31,147 LPs) form a long tail of pools with more
than ten sellers, suggesting coordinated campaigns that de-
liberately distribute execution across larger address sets.
Transition from single- to multi-wallet exits. When look-
ing at the yearly distribution of inflated seller count among
the pool by created day, we can observe that the distribu-
tion has shifted materially over time, which indicates the
changing of preferred fraud scheme toward multiple-wallet
drains. In 2019, single-seller drains accounted for 57% of all
cases, but their share declined steadily, reaching 28.3% by
the end of 2024. Figure 3(a) illustrates this trend in detail:
between 2018 and mid-2021, scams involving multiple sell-
ing wallets began to surpass traditional single-wallet exits.
After 2021, the proportions of small-wallet (1–10 sellers)
and large-wallet (10+ sellers) drains stabilized at roughly
35–45%, indicating that both strategies now coexist. Some
attackers continue to rely on a single controlled wallet for
operational simplicity, while others increasingly adopt multi-
wallet coordination to evade heuristic detection. Overall, the
data confirm a clear shift from single-wallet to multi-wallet
execution, consistent with the identity-evasion strategy dis-
cussed in §4.2.3.
Owner wallet involvement. Among the flagged LPs,
33.13% (34,927 LPs) recorded the involvement of LP’s
owner address in committing inflated selling activity. Fig-
ure 3(b) illustrates the temporal trend of owner wallet
participation among flagged pools. The data show a sharp


(a) Shifting in involved wallets used to participate in inflated selling in each
LPs among labeled FRP
(b) Proportion of FRP LPs with owner address participated in inflated selling
exits
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
0
1
2
3
4
5
4
76
8, 195
8, 524
21, 455
39, 351
27, 829
Year
FRP LPs (×104)
(c) Number of FRP-labeled LPs created by year
Figure 3: Temporal and actor-side evolution of FRP scams
decline in direct owner involvement after 2019, dropping
from over 65% of pools in early datasets to roughly 25-30%
in 2020-2022, and stabilizing near this lower range through
2023. A minor rebound is visible in 2022–2023, suggesting
that some attackers intermittently returned to partial owner
participation, likely using low-impact or mixed-owner sells
that remain below detection thresholds. By 2024, however,
the share falls again to its lowest point (24%), confirming
that most recent FRP scams now shifting toward the trend
of avoiding the involvement deployer wallet in their exit.
This pattern aligns with the broader shift toward multi-
wallet and delegated execution discussed earlier: as public
awareness and heuristic tools increasingly flag large owner-
originated sells, scammers appear to have systematically
phased out direct owner involvement.
Wallets that are involved in multiple LPs. We further
examine wallets that appear in more than one flagged LP,
i.e., any address that conducts inflated selling in at least
two pools. Among the 401,838 distinct wallets involved
in inflated selling, 127,252 (31.67%) are recurrent, while
274,586 (68.33%) occur only once. Table 2 lists the five
most active recurrent wallets and their LP participation
counts. Recurrence is highly concentrated.
The most active address (0xae2...FaE13) appears in
16,525 flagged LPs, more than twice the count of the next
most active wallet (0x77a...C65d1, with 8,097 LPs). All
top-10 wallets exceed 2.4k appearances, the top-20 remain
above 1.4k, and even the 50th most active wallet still shows
662 occurrences. However, recurrence does not necessarily
correlate with illicit profit: several wallets involved in fewer
LPs earned higher gains (see Table 2).
TABLE 2: Top Addresses by FRP Pool Participation
Scammer
address
FRP inflated
selling involved
Profit
(USD)
0xae2...FaE13
16525
$9,009,675
0x77a...C65d1
8097
$1,276,803
0x3fC...b7FAD
3303
$79,378,720
0xE59...61564
2798
$59,945,861
0xf9c...ABE68
2736
$466,592
6.2. Action-Centric Analysis
We analyze the behavioral dynamics of inflated selling
within flagged liquidity pools. We contrast two operational
axes: (i) single- v.s. multi-wallet execution, which captures
whether the attack is conducted through a single dominant
address or multiple coordinated ones, and (ii) owner v.s.
non-owner participation, reflecting whether the deployer
wallet itself engages in the manipulation. Each combination
thus represents a behavioral cohort of strategies.
Measurement methodology. For each LP p, we extract
three temporal and activity-based features:
• The first-sell delay ∆t(p)
first = min(t(p)
sell)−t(p)
create, measuring
the onset of draining relative to pool creation.
• The sell span ∆t(p)
span = max(t(p)
sell)−min(t(p)
sell), quantifying
the duration of sustained selling.
• The number of inflated sells n(p)
sell, representing the total
intensity of selling time.
These measurements reveal how aggressively and persis-
tently each LP is exploited. We show our results in Table 3
and explain them as below.
TABLE 3: Selling Behavior across Wallet and Ownership
Single Wallet
Multiple Wallets
Metric
Owner
Non-owner
Owner
Non-owner
No. LPs
11,613
17,960
23,314
52,547
Avg First-sell (days)
2.16
1.55
0.68
0.84
Avg No. Sell
3.34
3.38
82.47
96.62
Avg Sell Span (days)
0.45
0.24
11.76
6.34
Behavioral trends. Single-wallet scams are characterized by
rapid and compact liquidation phases. The median first-sell
occurs within approximately 1.5–2 days after deployment,
and selling activity typically concludes within a narrow win-
dow (median span below one day). The strategy is largely
scripted and executed shortly after liquidity provisioning,
with minimal attempt to disguise exit behavior. The average
number of inflated sells remains low (around 3.4 transactions


(a) The number of total distinct seller wallets in all flagged FRP LPs
(b) The number of distinct inflated sell order among all flagged FRP LPs
Figure 4: Distribution of inflated selling wallets and inflated
sell counts in all of flagged FRP LPs
per pool), consistent with a single address completing most
of the drain in one or two bursts of activity.
In contrast, multi-wallet LPs exhibit a different temporal
pattern. Their first-sell actions occur sooner, often within
the first 12–20 hours on average, but their selling extends
for significantly longer, with mean spans stretching over
6–12 days. This elongated pattern indicates that multi-wallet
setups distribute draining activity over time, potentially
to evade transaction-level heuristics or simulate organic
user interaction. The total number of sell transactions per
pool rises dramatically (by more than an order of mag-
nitude), suggesting a clear operational distinction: single-
wallet scams are opportunistic and direct, whereas multi-
wallet scams are structured, strategic, and persistent.
Owner v.s. non-owner participation. Comparing owner-
involved and non-owner LPs reveals systematic timing dif-
ferences. Pools where the deployer directly participates in
selling tend to initiate liquidation earlier, reflecting the at-
tacker’s immediate control and awareness of deployment
timing. In contrast, non-owner executions exhibit longer
sell spans, consistent with delegated draining that unfolds
gradually over time. This pattern suggests an obfuscation
strategy, in which the deployer’s address abstains from direct
selling to reduce traceability, transferring exit operations to
auxiliary wallets instead.
6.3. Categorization of FRP Behaviors
We extend our analysis to structural characteristics ob-
servable across all LPs, covering both single- and multi-
wallet LPs. Each pool is characterized by its number of
20
40
60
80
100
Number of seller wallets
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Total number of sells
Other LPs
Minimal Drains LPs (n=28,395)
Distributed Campaigns LPs (n=22,740)
Moderate Networks LPs (n=40,271)
Figure 5: Scatter distribution of scam LP behaviors by wallet
count and sell activity.
unique wallets conducting inflated selling (seller count) and
the total number of sell transactions (sell count).
Figure 4(a) shows the frequency distribution of the
number of distinct seller wallets (seller count) involved
in each pool (from 1 to 100 sellers for demonstration).
The distribution is highly right-skewed, which indicates that
while many scammers still adopt minimal wallet setups, a
growing subset deliberately fragments their selling activity
across a large network of addresses, likely to avoid identity-
based detection (Predicate (C)).
Figure 4(b) further plots the number of sell orders
(sell count) executed per pool (from 1 to 100 inflated sell
for demonstration). Similar to the seller distribution, most
scams exhibit only a handful of selling transactions, yet a
small fraction perform extensive sequences of sales (some-
times exceeding fifty per pool) demonstrating systematic
fragmentation (Predicate (B)).
Together, these distributions highlight the heterogeneity
of execution patterns among evasive scams, motivating the
actor- and action-centric analyses that follow. In addition,
to capture more meaningful behavioral space, we bin both
axes into interpretable ranges:
•
Wallet bins: 1, 2–4, 5–9, and 10+;
•
Sell bins: 0–9, 10–49, 50–249, and 250+.
The resulting 4×4 grid summarizes LP behaviors, with
each bin’s share representing its percentage among all de-
tected scam pools. Figure 5 visualizes this distribution,
where each point corresponds to a flagged LP positioned by
its number of seller wallets (x-axis) and total sell transac-
tions (y-axis). Points are color-coded to highlight behavioral
categories: Minimal Drains, Distributed Campaigns, and
Moderate Networks. Residual pools outside these clusters
are shown in light gray. Table 4 further summarizes the
dominant regions within this behavioral space.
Three dominant behavioral categories emerge, together
accounting for over 75% of all identified scam LPs:
• Minimal Drains (26.9%). Pools with a single wallet and
fewer than ten sell transactions. These represent the sim-


TABLE 4: Dominant inflated-selling categories.
Category
Definition (Wallets, Total sells)
Share of LPs
Minimal Drains
1 wallet, 0–9 sells
26.9%
Distributed Campaigns
≥10 wallets, 50–249 sells
21.6%
Moderate Networks
2–9 wallets, ≤50 sells
27.3%
Other
-
≈24.1%
plest form of exit scam: a one-operator event involving
minimal coordination and a short time horizon. The actor
typically drains liquidity soon after deployment with little
evidence of distribution.
• Distributed campaigns (21.6%). Pools operated by large
coordinated groups (≥10 wallets) with moderate sell
activity (50–249 transactions). These scams exhibit struc-
tured execution and likely prefer to rotate wallets or
fragment sales, maintaining liquidity appearance before
completing their LP extraction process. Their scale and
repetition suggest sustained, systematized operations.
• Moderate networks (27.3%). Formed by mid-sized groups
(2–9 wallets) engaging in up to 50 sells per pool. These
LPs combine mild coordination with measured selling ac-
tivity, possibly reflecting adaptive behaviors of scammers
scaling from individual to distributed operation.
A smaller fraction (< 25%) of LPs lie outside, either
exhibiting irregular patterns or incomplete trading records.
Finding-(§5): We identified 105,434 FRP pools and
found that evasive exits are frequent.
• Single-seller scams remain the majority but show a
steady decline (from 57% to 28.3% between 2019
and 2024), while multi-wallet exits have risen contin-
uously and now account for nearly half of all cases.
• Owner involvement has decreased from 65% to 24%,
reflecting a growing preference for delegated execu-
tion through secondary wallets.
• Temporal and behavioral analyses reveal two pat-
terns: (i) rapid, single-wallet drains; (ii) slow, dis-
tributed exits emphasizing stealth.
7. Discussion
7.1. Mitigation and Early-Warning
Fragmented rug pull remain difficult to identify in real
time because they mimic legitimate trading dynamics and
distribute execution across multiple addresses. We still rec-
ommend a series of proactive checks for mitigation.
• Verify token intent and behavioral consistency. Cross-
check the token’s stated utility (e.g., governance, staking,
yield) with its on-chain activity. Inconsistencies between
declared purpose and observed liquidity actions, such as
continuous sell pressure or recurring distributor creation,
should be treated as risk indicators.
• Evaluate LP-token status. Confirm that the initial LP
tokens are either burnt or locked under verifiable mech-
anisms. Unburned transferable LP tokens remain the
strongest structural prerequisite for any rug pull vari-
ant. Open-source tools like Etherscan, DEXTools, and
Chainalysis can assist with verification.
• Monitor gradual liquidity changes. FRP drain liquidity
over hours or days rather than instantly. Track LP balances
and ownership over time; repeated small sells coupled
with a steady net liquidity decline are strong indicators
of an ongoing stealth exit.
• Leverage cross-wallet forensics. FRP rely on many dis-
tributor addresses. Apply clustering and linkage heuristics
to detect shared funding sources, synchronized transaction
timings, or repeated reuse of intermediary addresses. Inte-
grate these relational signals into monitoring dashboards
or analytic APIs for better early warning capability.
We note that these methods emphasize pattern-oriented
detection rather than isolated event alerts. This broader,
behavior-based view allows systems to capture fuzzy yet
recurring anomalies, aligning with our observation that frag-
mented rug pulls evade per-transaction heuristics but become
visible through aggregated behavioral trends.
7.2. Comparison to Related Concepts
Stock dilution. A fragmented rug pull shares conceptual
parallels with unauthorized stock dilution in traditional fi-
nance, where issuers increase the circulating supply without
shareholder approval or disclosure. Regulatory authorities
such as the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) strictly prohibit unapproved share issuance and naked
short selling [36], [37]. For instance, SEC sanctioned Gold-
man Sachs for facilitating trades that created synthetic stock
exposure without regulatory consent [36].
Similarly, in a fragmented rug pull, token deployers
retain unilateral control over token supply and can gradually
reduce existing holders’ value through incremental sell-offs.
Although executed via decentralized smart contracts, this
process follows the same principle as illicit stock issuance:
expanding one’s redeemable share while bypassing consent
and transparency requirements [38], [39].
MEV bots. FRP may appear similar to automated arbitrage
activity because both involve frequent, small-volume trades
that gradually adjust liquidity pool balances. However, their
mechanisms and intentions are fundamentally different.
MEV bots are autonomous agents that exploit short-
lived price discrepancies across pools or exchanges [40],
[41]. Their trades are economically neutral, driven by trans-
parent, rule-based strategies that restore price equilibrium
rather than extract value through deception. In contrast,
a fragmented rug pull deliberately splits large sell orders
and distributes them across multiple wallets to conceal co-
ordinated liquidity drainage. While arbitrage bots stabilize
markets by realigning token ratios, FRP destabilize them by
continuously removing real liquidity through inflated selling.
Moreover, arbitrage agents have no privileged access to LP
tokens or minting rights. Their profits arise from market
inefficiencies, not control over supply.


7.3. Applications To DeFi Communities
Beyond detection, our FRP model enables preventive
mechanisms for AMMs. Because FRP behavior must sat-
isfy specific structural predicates, DEXes can introduce
lightweight safeguards such as adaptive fees for abnormal
micro-sell bursts or temporary throttling of suspicious multi-
wallet activity. These require no off-chain signals and can
operate transparently within permissionless pools.
Our behavioral taxonomy also informs ecosystem tools.
Wallets and DEX aggregators can expose FRP-risk indi-
cators to end users, while analytics platforms can incor-
porate our wallet–sell distributions to flag unstable pools.
At a broader level, the observed cross-wallet coordination
patterns support market-level scam modeling and regula-
tory investigations, offering a new lens for understanding
liquidity-drain dynamics across DeFi networks.
7.4. Design Trade-Off
Our measurement targets liquidity pools with observable
lifetimes shorter than 100 days, as a trade-off between
coverage and precision in identifying fraudulent pools.
Empirically, short-lived pools are highly symptomatic of
malicious or fraudulent behavior. Large-scale analyses [42]
[43] [44] show that most known rug pull or scam tokens
collapse within weeks of deployment, with a median lifetime
below 30 days. By contrast, legitimate DeFi projects sustain
trading activities well beyond this period.
We therefore select 100 days as an operational boundary
to balance two competing objectives:
• reducing false negatives by capturing the majority of
short-lived, high-risk pools; and
• avoiding false positives from legitimate tokens that exhibit
natural liquidity fluctuations over longer horizons.
Although some evasive FRP variants may prolong their
operation through slower or staged liquidity drains, expand-
ing the observation window would admit numerous benign
cases (e.g.,seasonal liquidity shifts or post-airdrop volatility)
that do not indicate coordinated exits.
8. Related Works on DeFi Fraud Detections
Earlier studies established broad taxonomies of DeFi
scams [45], We present representive ones.
Rug pull and Honeypot. Rug pulls remain the most studied
DEX-specific scam, where liquidity providers abruptly with-
draw their tokens to drain a pool’s reserves. Bruno et al. [3]
applied machine learning to identify rug-pull and scam-
prone tokens based on transaction histories and contract
metadata. Cernera et al. [5] conducted a longitudinal analy-
sis of rug-pull lifetimes on Ethereum and BNB Smart Chain.
Honeypots embed malicious logic into the token’s smart
contract, trapping buyers who attempt to sell back their to-
kens and thereby enabling the deployer to seize their funds.
Such contract-level frauds have drawn extensive attention
from the research community [46], [47], [48], [49]. Run-
dong et al. [47] proposed heuristic-based honeypot detec-
tion, and Christof et al. [46] expanded symbolic-execution
models to identify malicious logic before deployment.
However, these approaches rely on static rule-based
heuristics, i.e., flagging a single large owner withdrawal
or a high-impact sell. We move beyond static detection by
introducing a dynamic as well as fine-grained framework
that models both temporal and multi-actor behaviors.
More
on-chain
scams. Beyond DEX-specific studies,
broader research for on-chain DeFi crimes examined a wide
spectrum of manipulative behaviors, including pump-and-
dump events [50], [51], Ponzi and pyramid schemes [52],
[53], and decentralized money-laundering patterns used by
scammers to conceal illicit gains [54]. NFT-related rug
pulls [55] also attracted attention due to the massive eco-
nomic impact of the NFT ecosystem [56].
Another emerging category is the counterfeit token
scam, where attackers issue tokens under the same name
as legitimate cryptocurrencies to deceive investors [57]. In
addition, several niche but profitable scams (e.g., frontrun-
ning [58], role-play frauds [59]) have been investigated to
decode their operational signatures. Malicious actors contin-
uously modify transaction behaviors to evade static detection
heuristics, and capturing new scams is always challenging.
Scam detection. Blockchain scam detection has evolved
from early rule-based heuristics to more contextual and
data-driven approaches. Traditional detectors rely on static
signals (e.g., large owner sells, sudden liquidity withdrawals,
or rapid price drops [3], [5], [46], [47]) but their fixed
thresholds and dependence on known actor identities make
them easy to evade and mostly useful only after the scam
has unfolded. Recent work [6] introduces temporal features
and adaptive logic to better capture manipulation. Parallel
efforts use graph and neural models to identify abnormal
wallet behavior or collusive structures [60], [61], [62], [63],
though these methods require large labelled datasets and
often lack interpretability when applied to LP dynamics.
Ours! To our knowledge, no prior study formally decom-
poses rug-pull heuristics into underlying atomic conditions.
We conceptually extend their scope and identify a rich set
of evasive strategies that have been previously overlooked.
9. Conclusion
This paper introduces the fragmented rug pull (FRP)
scam, a family of evasive exit strategies in DEXs. Attackers
split sell volumes, spread actions across wallets, and bypass
existing impact-/identity-based detectors via various combi-
nations. Our model generalizes static behavioral thresholds
into dynamic ones to capture such long-running exits.
We conducted a large-scale measurement of 303,614
on-chain liquidity pools and identified 105,434 scams. We
also observed that multi-wallet exits have steadily replaced
single-wallet drains, and direct owner participation has
dropped from 65% to 24%. Modern scammers are becoming
“smarter”. We issue a strong warning to DeFi communities.


Ethical Considerations
Our study completely complies with ethical guidelines
for computer security and information systems research,
as outlined in the Menlo Report (listed by IEEE S&P).
All experiments and analysis were conducted on publicly
available/accessible blockchain on-chain data from the pub-
lic Ethereum blockchain, which is accessible for everyone
on internet. Our measurement and experiment not contain
interaction with human subjects, collection of personal iden-
tifiable information, or off-chain tracing of private individ-
ual/action by any form. All wallet addresses, transaction
hashes, and smart contracts analyzed are public knowledge
(if full-address and project name mentioned) or anonymized
(by hiding the middle part of every involved wallet/token
address involved in the study).
Complying with responsible disclosure principles, we
did not exploit or interact with any live DeFi protocol or
smart contract beyond passive observation and public data
collection to perform our experiment upon. We make no
attempt to deanonymize, link, indicate or attribute them
to real-world identities. No vulnerabilities or exploitable
software flaws were disclosed during this research.
We believe this work contributes positively to ecosys-
tem security by empirically identifying evasive scam be-
haviors that undermine trust in decentralized finance. By
making only aggregated and anonymized findings public,
we mitigate any potential misuse of our detection logic
while providing the research community with a transparent,
reproducible framework for future scam analysis.
Open Science.
We release all the key materials/artifact that are used
in this study to promote science transparency and support
reproducibility to any future research within the same area.
We public all the research-relevant dataset (anonymized),
code and instruction, which can be accessible at [8]. We
encourage the community to reuse our artifacts, indepen-
dently verify our measurements, and extend our research
toward stronger defenses for DeFi ecosystems.
Ethical Usage of LLMs.
This work involved limited use of large language models
(e.g., ChatGPT) solely for language refinement purposes.
The models were used to improve grammar and typos.
The content was written entirely by the authors. No parts
of the manuscript, including conceptual content, technical
descriptions, data analysis, or results, were generated by
any GenAI or LLMs. All scientific ideas, analyses, and
conclusions are the sole responsibility of the authors.
References
[1]
Sam Werner, Daniel Perez, Lewis Gudgeon, Ariah Klages-Mundt,
Dominik Harz, and William Knottenbelt. SoK: Decentralized finance
(DeFi). In ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies
(AFT), 2022.
[2]
Dexs total value locked by chain.
https://defillama.com, 2025.
[3]
Bruno Mazorra, Victor Adan, and Vanesa Daza.
Do not rug on
me: Leveraging machine learning techniques for automated scam
detection. Mathematics, 10(6):949, 2022.
[4]
Statistic on cryptocurrency scam lost by category.
https://www.ch
ainalysis.com/blog/2024-pig-butchering-scam-revenue-grows-yoy/,
2025.
[5]
Federico Cernera, Massimo La Morgia, Alessandro Mei, and
Francesco Sassi. Token spammers, rug pulls, and sniper bots: An
analysis of the ecosystem of tokens in Ethereum and in the Binance
smart chain (BNB). In Proceeding of the USENIX Security Sympo-
sium (USENIX Sec), pages 3349–3366, 2023.
[6]
Minh Trung Tran, Nasrin Sohrabi, Zahir Tari, Qin Wang, Minhui Xue,
and Xiaoyu Xia. Slow is fast! dissecting Ethereum’s slow liquidity
drain scams. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04850, 2025.
[7]
Labeled frp lps dataset. https://anonymous.4open.science/r/FRP sou
rce/analysis/labeled pool anonimized.json, 2025.
[8]
Frp anonymized source code for reproduction.
https://anonymous.
4open.science/r/FRP source, November 2025.
[9]
ERC-20 token standard.
https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/st
andards/tokens/erc-20/, 2025.
[10] Qin Wang and Shiping Chen. Account abstraction, analysed. In IEEE
International Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain), 2023.
[11] Ethereum account type.
https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/accou
nts/, 2025.
[12] Uniswap main page.
https://app.uniswap.org/, 2025.
[13] Jiahua Xu, Krzysztof Paruch, Simon Cousaert, and Yebo Feng.
SoK: Decentralized exchanges (DEX) with automated market maker
(AMM) protocols. ACM Computing Survey (CSUR), 55(11), 2023.
[14] AMM formula for calculating token price from liquidity pool value.
https://docs.uniswap.org/contracts/v2/concepts/protocol-overview/ho
w-uniswap-works, 2025.
[15] How are prices determined? uniswap.
https://docs.uniswap.org/con
tracts/v2/concepts/advanced-topics/pricing, 2025.
[16] Erya Jiang, Bo Qin, et al. Decentralized finance (DeFi): A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05282, 2023.
[17] Token burning in transparency aspect.
https://smithii.io/en/burn-liq
uidity-pool-solana/#:∼:text=Burning%20or%20locking%20the%20L
iquidity,whose%20liquidity%20is%20not%20burned., 2025.
[18] Jiahua Xu and Benjamin Livshits. The anatomy of a cryptocurrency
Pump-and-Dump scheme. In USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Sec), pages 1609–1625, 2019.
[19] Massimo La Morgia, Alessandro Mei, Francesco Sassi, and Julinda
Stefa. The doge of wall street: Analysis and detection of pump and
dump cryptocurrency manipulations. ACM Transactions on Internet
Technology (ATIT), 23(1):1–28, 2023.
[20] Libra scam considered got charged by fbi.
https://www.ainvest.co
m/news/fbi-doj-eye-charges-against-argentine-president-milei-over-l
ibra-meme-coin-scandal-25021010cad8cd5ff23c6c70/, 2025.
[21] Safereum scam report. https://www.certik.com/resources/blog/safere
um-exit-scam, 2025.
[22] Zhonghua scam report.
https://www.certik.com/resources/blog/tax-f
ree-fraud-exposing-the-zhonghua-scam, 2025.
[23] Other motivation examples.
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/FR
P source/analysis/motivation examples.md, 2025.
[24] Herbert A Simon.
A behavioral model of rational choice.
The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, pages 99–118, 1955.
[25] Gary S Becker.
Crime and punishment: An economic approach.
Journal of political economy, 76(2):169–217, 1968.


[26] Andres Fabrega, Amy Zhao, Jay Yu, James Austgen, Sarah Allen,
Kushal Babel, Mahimna Kelkar, and Ari Juels. Voting-Bloc entropy:
A new metric for DAO decentralization. In USENIX Security Sym-
posium (USENIX Sec), pages 1299–1318, 2025.
[27] Qin Wang, Guangsheng Yu, Yilin Sai, Caijun Sun, Lam Duc Nguyen,
and Shiping Chen.
Understanding DAOs: An empirical study on
governance dynamics. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social
Systems (TCSS), 2025.
[28] Balancer main page.
https://balancer.fi/, 2025.
[29] PancakeSwap main page.
https://pancakeswap.finance/, 2025.
[30] Curve Finance main page.
https://curve.fi/#/ethereum/swap, 2025.
[31] BancorSwap main page.
https://bancor.network/, 2025.
[32] SushiSwap main page.
https://www.sushi.com/, 2025.
[33] go-ethereum.
https://geth.ethereum.org/, 2025.
[34] Chainanalysis API documentation.
https://docs.transpose.io/, 2025.
[35] Defillama statistic in defi slow-down in mid 2024.
https://defillama
.com/chain/ethereum/, 2024.
[36] Nyse receives approval to limit reach of shareholder approval rule.
https://www.sec.gov/files/rules/sro/nyse/2023/34-99238.pdf/, 2024.
[37] Understanding about equity dilution - morgan stanley. https://www.
morganstanley.com/atwork/articles/what-is-equity-dilution/, 2024.
[38] Sec charges goldman sachs with improper securities lending practices.
https://www.sec.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2016-9/, 2024.
[39] Sec charges goldman sachs with improper securities lending practices.
https://www.sec.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2014-248/, 2014.
[40] Ben Weintraub, Christof Ferreira Torres, Cristina Nita-Rotaru, and
Radu State. A flash (bot) in the pan: Measuring maximal extractable
value in private pools. In Proceedings of the ACM Internet Measure-
ment Conference (IMC), pages 458–471, 2022.
[41] Zihao Li, Jianfeng Li, Zheyuan He, Xiapu Luo, Ting Wang, Xiaoze
Ni, Wenwu Yang, Xi Chen, and Ting Chen. Demystifying DeFi MEV
activities in flashbots bundle. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), pages
165–179, 2023.
[42] Chainalysis crypto crime report 2023. https://www.chainalysis.com/
blog/2023-crypto-crime-report-introduction/, 2023.
[43] Chainalysis crypto crime report 2024. https://go.chainalysis.com/cry
pto-crime-2024.html/, 2024.
[44] Rugdoc analytics: community-maintained rug-pull tracker.
https:
//rugdoc.io/, 2025.
[45] Liyi Zhou, Xihan Xiong, Jens Ernstberger, Stefanos Chaliasos,
Zhipeng Wang, Ye Wang, Kaihua Qin, Roger Wattenhofer, Dawn
Song, and Arthur Gervais. Sok: Decentralized finance (defi) attacks.
In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 2444–2461.
IEEE, 2023.
[46] Christof Ferreira Torres, Mathis Steichen, et al. The art of the scam:
Demystifying honeypots in ethereum smart contracts. In Proceeding
of the USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Sec), pages 1591–1607,
2019.
[47] Rundong Gan, Le Wang, and Xiaodong Lin.
Why trick me: The
honeypot traps on decentralized exchanges. In ACM CCS Workshop
on Decentralized Finance and Security (DeFi@CCS), pages 17–23,
2023.
[48] Leyi Shi, Yang Li, Tianxu Liu, Jia Liu, Baoying Shan, and Honglong
Chen.
Dynamic distributed honeypot based on blockchain.
IEEE
Access, 2019.
[49] Weili Chen, Xiongfeng Guo, Zhiguang Chen, Zibin Zheng, Yutong
Lu, and Yin Li.
Honeypot contract risk warning on Ethereum
smart contracts. In IEEE International Conference on Joint Cloud
Computing (JCC), 2020.
[50] JT Hamrick, Farhang Rouhi, Arghya Mukherjee, Marie Vasek, Tyler
Moore, and Neil Gandal.
Analyzing target-based cryptocurrency
pump and dump schemes. In ACM CCS Workshop on Decentralized
Finance and Security (DeFi@CCS), pages 21–27, 2021.
[51] Jiahua Xu and Benjamin Livshits. The anatomy of a cryptocurrency
pump-and-dump scheme.
In Proceeding of the USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Sec), pages 1609–1625, 2019.
[52] Weimin Chen, Xinran Li, Yuting Sui, Ningyu He, Haoyu Wang, Lei
Wu, and Xiapu Luo. Sadponzi: Detecting and characterizing Ponzi
schemes in Ethereum smart contracts. ACM on Measurement and
Analysis of Computing Systems (POMACS), 5(2):1–30, 2021.
[53] Weili Chen, Zibin Zheng, Jiahui Cui, Edith Ngai, Peilin Zheng, and
Yuren Zhou. Detecting Ponzi schemes on ethereum: Towards healthier
blockchain technology. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference
(WWW), pages 1409–1418, 2018.
[54] Dan Lin, Jiajing Wu, Yunmei Yu, Qishuang Fu, Zibin Zheng, and
Changlin Yang. Denseflow: Spotting cryptocurrency money launder-
ing in ethereum transaction graphs. In Proceedings of the ACM Web
Conference (WWW), pages 4429–4438, 2024.
[55] Jintao Huang, Ningyu He, Kai Ma, Jiang Xiao, and Haoyu Wang.
Miracle or mirage? a measurement study of NFT rug pulls. ACM on
Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems (POMACS), 7(3):1–
25, 2023.
[56] Qin Wang, Rujia Li, Qi Wang, and Shiping Chen. Non-fungible token
(NFT): Overview, evaluation, opportunities and challenges.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2105.07447, 2021.
[57] Bingyu Gao, Haoyu Wang, Pengcheng Xia, Siwei Wu, Yajin Zhou,
Xiapu Luo, and Gareth Tyson. Tracking counterfeit cryptocurrency
end-to-end. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis
of Computing Systems (POMACS), 4(3):1–28, 2020.
[58] Christof Ferreira Torres, Ramiro Camino, et al. Frontrunner jones and
the raiders of the dark forest: An empirical study of frontrunning on
the ethereum blockchain. In USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Sec), pages 1343–1359, 2021.
[59] Weilin Li, Zhun Wang, Chenyu Li, Heying Chen, Taiyu Wong,
Pengyu Sun, Yufei Yu, and Chao Zhang.
Unmasking role-play
attack strategies in exploiting decentralized finance (defi) systems. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Decentralized Finance and Security
(DeFi@CCS), pages 33–39, 2023.
[60] Voon Hou Su, Sourav Sen Gupta, and Arijit Khan. Automating etl
and mining of ethereum blockchain network. In ACM International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM), 2022.
[61] Youssef Elmougy and Ling Liu. Demystifying fraudulent transactions
and illicit nodes in the bitcoin network for financial forensics. In
ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(SIGKDD), 2023.
[62] Ling Cheng, Feida Zhu, Yong Wang, Ruicheng Liang, and Huiwen
Liu.
Evolve path tracer: Early detection of malicious addresses
in cryptocurrency.
In ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGKDD), 2023.
[63] Haaroon Yousaf, George Kappos, and Sarah Meiklejohn.
Tracing
transactions across cryptocurrency ledgers.
In Proceeding of the
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Sec), 2019.
