Experimental demonstration of non-local magic in a superconducting
quantum processor
Halima Giovanna Ahmad
1†, Gianluca Esposito
2,3†, Viviana Stasino
1, Jovan Odavi´c
1,3,
Carlo Cosenza
1, Alessandro Sarno
1, Pasquale Mastrovito
1, Michele Viscardi
1,3,
Stefano Cusumano
1,3, Francesco Tafuri
1*, Davide Massarotti
4, Alioscia Hamma
1,2,3*
1Dipartimento di Fisica “Ettore Pancini”, Universit`a degli Studi di Napoli “Federico II”, Complesso
Universitario di Monte Sant’Angelo, Via Cinthia, 21, Napoli, 80126, Italy.
2Mathematical and Physical Sciences for Advanced Material and Technologies, Scuola Superiore
Meridionale, Via Mezzocannone, 4, Napoli, 80134, Italy.
3Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN), Sezione di Napoli, Complesso Universitario di Monte
Sant’Angelo, Via Cinthia, 21, Napoli, 80126, Italy.
4Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica e delle Tecnologie per l’Informazione, Via Claudio, Napoli, 80125,
Italy.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): francesco.tafuri@unina.it; alioscia.hamma@unina.it;
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Magic is a non-classical resource whose efficient manipulation is fundamental to advancing efficient and scalable
fault-tolerant quantum computing. Quantum advantage is possible only if both magic and entanglement are present.
Of particular interest is non-local magic - the fraction of the resource that cannot be distilled (or erased) by local
unitary operations - which is a necessary feature for quantum complex behavior. We perform the first experimental
demonstration of non-local magic in a superconducting Quantum Processing Unit (QPU). Direct access to the QPU
device enables us to identify and characterize the dominant noise mechanisms intrinsic to the quantum hardware. We
observe excellent agreement between theory and experiment without the need for any free parameter in the noise
modeling of our system and shows the experimental capability of harnessing both local and non-local magic resources
separately, thereby offering a promising path towards more reliable pre-fault-tolerant quantum devices and to advance
hardware-aware research in quantum information in the near term. Finally, the methods and tools developed in this
work are conducive to the experimental realization of efficient purity estimation (featuring exponential speedup) and
the decoding of Hawking radiation from a toy-model of a Black Hole.
An essential objective in quantum information science is
to identify the physical resources that lead to quantum
computational speedups over classical algorithms [11–15].
Entanglement is necessary for universal fault-tolerant
quantum computation, though not sufficient for quan-
tum advantage. A common paradigm for fault-tolerant
operations uses the stabilizer formalism [1, 16]. In this
framework, the additional resources needed for quantum
advantage are non-stabilizer states, namely those resources
that go beyond Clifford operations, also colloquially known
as magic [2, 3, 17]. A system that only uses stabilizer
operations may have access to extensive entanglement
(and no magic), while exclusively using local operations
allows for generation of extensive magic (but no entan-
glement). Notably, in both cases these systems can be
efficiently simulated on a classical computer. For this rea-
son, the onset of both quantum complex behavior and
quantum advantage resides in the interplay between the
two resources [6–8, 18–22].
So-called non-local magic [23] is a recent resource intro-
duced to capture the interplay between entanglement and
magic. It quantifies the fraction of non-stabilizer resources
that cannot be removed by local unitary operations and
operationally represents the amount of magic that cannot
be distilled using local operations. Even in the NISQ [24]
era, local and non-local magic are both believed to be
crucial for universal quantum computation [4]: in quan-
tum algorithms that rely on the preparation of complex
quantum states exhibiting non-local magic [25], or in
magic state distillation processes in fault-tolerant quan-
tum computing, where stabilizer codes are used to purify
non-stabilizer states and achieve fault-tolerant non-Clifford
operations [26, 27]. Notably, non-local magic can also be a
hindrance to some genuine quantum behavior. For instance,
if a state only contains non-local magic, then no Bell
inequality violations can occur [28]. Non-local magic plays
a role in the flourishing field of Anti-de Sitter/Conformal
Field Theory (AdS/CFT) correspondence, representing the
holographic counterpart of gravitational back-reaction [23].
This connection thus provides an additional intriguing link
between quantum advantage, error-correcting codes and
holography[29].
In this paper, we give the first experimental demon-
stration and measurement of non-local magic on a super-
conducting QPU shown in Fig. 1. We utilize Stabilizer
(R´enyi) Entropy (SRE) - the unique computable measure
of magic for pure states - which is experimentally measur-
able [30–32] via Randomized Measurement toolbox [33].
Our main result is that non-local magic is measurable in
real quantum devices. We measure it using two different
methods in three classes of states: i) those that have mostly
1
arXiv:2511.15576v1  [quant-ph]  19 Nov 2025


local magic, ii) those with both local and non-local magic,
and iii) those only possessing non-local magic. The first
method involves measuring residual magic after an opti-
mal local erasure protocol given the preparation and noise,
and the second, more direct approach hinges on measur-
ing the Schmidt coefficients via reduced density matrix
(RDM) [34]. Across the three classes of states, the two
methods yield results consistent both with the theoretical
predictions and with each other.
In the NISQ era of quantum devices it becomes of
paramount importance to investigate the relationship
between experimentally measured magic on real devices
and noise sources, as well as the characteristic physical
parameters of the hardware itself. Our experimental inves-
tigation opens new avenues for studying the impact of
noise sources on quantum hardware. We find that the
greater source of error is given by readout errors, which are
responsible for injecting local magic. Moreover, noise and
decoherence will generally reduce state purity, hence one
needs to maintain the state at a very high purity. Here, we
show that non-local noise can be modeled as a depolarizing
Controlled-Z (CZ) channel and can be taken into account
in the quantum state preparation. This noise mainly affects
the optimal local magic erasure protocol, while being gen-
tle on the overall purity. In comparison, readout noise is
more impactful, but it can be tackled by error mitigation
techniques [35, 36].
Our approach to readout-noise mitigation reinforces
the idea that both local and non-local magic measure-
ment can be used to benchmark and calibrate quantum
devices beyond state-of-the-art protocols, e.g. Randomized
Benchmarking (RB), which extensively rely on Clifford
gates to benchmark gate fidelities [37–39]. We complement
recent proposals, which include the use of non-Clifford
gates to benchmark gate fidelity [40, 41], though lacking
information about the ability to generate and eventu-
ally manipulate magic for quantum advantage. Therefore,
our framework may help tackling current challenges in
hardware-aware quantum algorithms in the NISQ era,
advancing gate calibration and optimization, as well
as benchmarking computational resources for quantum
advantage in an accessible way.
Local and non-local stabilizer entropy
Stabilizer entropy characterizes the extent to which a quan-
tum state spreads over the Pauli operator basis, serving as
a measure of its departure from stabilizer states [30]. The
α SRE is defined as
Mα(ψ) =
1
1 −α log2
 
1
d
X
P ∈PN
|Tr(Pψ)|2α
!
,
(1)
where ψ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ| is the density matrix of the N-qubit
pure state |ψ⟩of dimension d = 2N. The set PN represents
the N−qubit Pauli strings composed from the identity and
Pauli operators {1, X, Y, Z}. For pure states, SRE with
α ≥2 constitutes a proper magic monotone in the context
of magic-state resource theory [30, 31]. For mixed states,
this quantity can be extended by subtracting the 2-R´enyi
entropy, that is, −log2(P(ψ)) where P(ψ) = Tr
 ψ2
is the
purity of ψ.
The interplay between entanglement and magic is
non-trivial: for example, factorized states cannot have max-
imum amount of magic even though the most commonly
used magic-injecting gate, the T gate, is a single-qubit gate.
This means that entanglement is necessary to reach higher
values of magic, and the value of magic obtainable in a
state is influenced by its entanglement [18]. This simple
fact suggests that there is an inherently non-local part of
magic that arises by using both non-Clifford and entan-
gling gates together. By construction, such non-local magic
cannot be extracted, or erased from a state by means of
local unitaries.
Non-local magic is defined as follows [23]: given H =
HA ⊗HB, then M NL
2
(|ψ⟩) = min
UA,UB M2(UA ⊗UB |ψ⟩), or
in other words, the minimal amount of magic contained
in a bipartite state upon optimization in all local bases.
Conversely, local magic of a state is defined as the dif-
ference between the total magic and the non-local one
M L
2 (|ψ⟩) = M2(|ψ⟩) −M NL
2
(|ψ⟩) and corresponds to the
amount of magic that can be removed from a state with
local gates. Notice that non-local magic is not simply magic
in entangled states: there are entangled states that only
host local magic, as in any state of the form (UA⊗UB)C |0⟩
where C |0⟩is an entangled stabilizer state. Remarkably,
maximally entangled states only possess local magic.
Despite being the result of an optimization proce-
dure, non-local magic is analytically computable for pure
two-qubit states [5] and is tied to the Schmidt decomposi-
tion of the state. We denote the class of states achieving
M NL(|ψλ⟩) = M(|ψλ⟩) as non-local magic states. More-
over, for two qubit states, non-local magic is a function
of the purity of the reduced density matrix (RDM) ψA :=
TrB |ψ⟩⟨ψ| (see Methods for details):
M NL(|ψ⟩) = −log2
 4P(ψA)2 −6P(ψA) + 3

.
(2)
This effectively amounts to measuring non-local magic
from the anti-flatness of the entanglement spectrum, as
proposed in [23]. Thus, by measuring RDM purity, we get
a direct measurement of a state’s non-local magic to test
the local optimal erasure protocol against. In this work
we focus on the experimental realization of a minimal
setting involving two qubits, and investigate representative
examples of Local Magic (LM), Local + Non-Local Magic
(M) and Non-Local Magic (NLM) states. In the following,
we measure non-local magic both from the local optimal
erasure protocol via local unitaries (obtained numerically
and then implemented on quantum hardware) and from
subsystem purity measurements. Taken together, these two
approaches provide a bona-fide experimental confirmation
of non-local magic.
Despite the nascent importance of non-local magic in
understanding quantum physics phenomena [5, 19, 23], its
role in quantum algorithms and broader quantum infor-
mation processing tasks is yet to be fully understood. As
a preliminary step in this direction, we prove a lemma,
found in Supplemental Information, which establishes that
the local magic is the maximum amount of magic that
2


can be distilled from a two-qubit state to a third ancil-
lary state without disrupting the entanglement of the two
initial qubits. Such a scenario can be relevant in realistic
quantum computing protocols, as the possibility of imple-
menting multi-qubit gates can be limited by the physical
connectivity of the quantum hardware.
The device
The superconducting Quantum Processing Unit (sQPU)
used in this work is a Contralto-D from Quantware (Fig. 1
(a)), composed of 21 flux-tunable transmons and 4 fixed-
frequency transmon qubits (in yellow). The fixed-frequency
qubits are specifically designed for coherence times bench-
marking, i. e. they lack drive lines to minimize radiative
interaction with the environment, are isolated and not
affected by flux noise. The sQPU is thermally and mechani-
cally anchored at the coldest stage of a BlueforsXLD1000SL
(the mixing chamber, MXC), and is enclosed by two mag-
netic shields. At room temperature, the system uses Qblox
electronics, which is comprised of two main parts: Clusters
(equipped with RF modules to implement drive, readout,
and two-qubit gates) and a low-noise SPI rack for setting
static DC flux. The full description of the setup is reported
in Supplemental Information.
The 21-qubits matrix has rectangular 2D connectivity,
where high-frequency bus resonators (in grey) are used to
couple neighboring qubits [42]. Qubits are designed to fall
in three frequency bandwidths: high-frequency qubits (in
red) have frequencies of the order of 6 GHz, intermediate
frequency qubits (in blue) have frequencies of the order of
5 GHz, low frequency qubits (in green) lie in a frequency
range of the order of 4 GHz. Each qubit is equipped with a
dedicated superconducting readout resonator, equally dis-
tributed over 4 readout feedlines in a notch-type geometry
(highlighted with different colors for clarity), hence guar-
anteeing multiplexed readout. Dedicated drive and flux
lines are used to implement X, Y, Z single-qubit and two-
qubit gates, respectively [43]. In fact, flux-lines are used to
implement the native two-qubit gate of the processor, the
Controlled-Z (CZ) gate, using magnetic Sudden-net-Zero
(SNZ) flux pulsed signals [44], combined with low 1/f-noise
static flux fields through bias-tees at room-temperature.
Flux lines also allow for parking qubits at specific working
points by using a static magnetic flux.
In this work, we focus on qubits D3 and C4 (interme-
diate and low frequency qubits), operated at their flux
sweet spots (Fig. 1 (b)). Additionally, the neighboring
qubit A6 has been placed at its sweet spot (at least 1GHz
detuned from the interested qubits), whereas the remain-
ing qubits of the matrix are operated at their anti-sweet
spot (in black). This allows us to operate in a quasi-ideal
2-qubit register and avoid frequency crowding. Notably,
flux-tunable transmons in the processor are designed to be
symmetric [45].
QPU’s non-local magic measurements
To overcome the exponential cost of direct measurement of
SRE with qubit number, we use a more scalable protocol,
namely Randomized Clifford Measurements (RCM)[32].
Anticipating purity-impacting noise in our device, we use
the mixed-state extension of SRE. Thus, our experimental
approach consists of two main steps: i) preparation of an
N-qubit state ψ; ii) implementation of the RCM protocol
to evaluate purity P and stabilizer purity W of the pre-
pared state ψ. These two independent quantities enable
estimation of SRE according to
M2(|ψ⟩) = −log2 W + log2 P −log2 d,
(3)
where P = d P
⃗s(−2)−∥⃗s∥2 EC

P(s1|C)P(s2|C)

, and W =
−P
⃗s(−2)−∥⃗s∥4 EC

P(s1|C)P(s2|C)P(s3|C)P(s4|C)

.
Here, si denote computational basis strings, and ∥· ∥refers
to their corresponding Hamming weight. The expectation
value EC indicates averaging over different random choices
of single-qubit Clifford gates C. To ensure statistical
reliability, a sufficiently large number of samples must be
considered, as discussed in Ref. [32].
After a thorough characterization and benchmarking
of the qubits, including measurements of readout and gate
fidelities, coherence times, and crosstalk effects, we per-
formed measurements of the SRE for the quantum states
summarized in Fig. 1 (c-f). The corresponding experimen-
tal results are presented in Extended Data Table 1, which
reports the measured fidelities, coherence, and crosstalk
parameters. These data provide direct insight into how the
relevant sources of error affect the estimation of magic in
our device.
We begin by considering single-qubit states prepared
on both the D3 and C4 qubits. Specifically, we examine the
computational basis state |0⟩and the superposition states
|+⟩and |−⟩, obtained by initializing the qubit in either
|0⟩or |1⟩and subsequently applying a Hadamard gate, as
illustrated in Fig. 1 (c) and (d). In these experiments, we
expect vanishing magic. By contrast, when a T gate is
introduced, the experimentally measured magic increases
and approaches the theoretical value of log2(4/3) ≈0.41.
Next, we measure magic for two-qubit quantum states
according to the circuit depicted in Fig. 1 (e). At this stage,
we choose not to implement any entangling gate between
the two qubits. Since magic is additive, experimental results
demonstrate that RCM can obtain experimental magic
values consistent with the sum of the values measured in
the isolated case, both with and without the injection of
non-Clifford gates. Additivity is consistent with the fairly
low impact of microwave and ZZ crosstalk [46, 47].
Finally, we measure magic for a Bell state, thus includ-
ing more complexity and hardware noise sources in the
experiment(see Fig. 1 (f)). From Extended Data Table
1 one notices: i) readout fidelities are lower in the case
of two-qubit states; ii) interleaved RB fidelities for the
native two-qubit gate CZ is considerably lower than single-
qubit gate RB fidelities, either measured in the isolated
(a) and coupled scheme (b), thus implicitly including any
microwave or ZZ-crosstalk. This explains the presence of
non-zero experimental magic in those cases where one does
not expect any.
We employ a classical post-processing error mitigation
scheme to counteract the effect of readout errors. This
scheme directly uses information from different benchmark-
ing tools to single out sources of crosstalk, thanks to direct
experimental control of the chip. In particular, our scheme
relies on the knowledge of the readout calibration matrix
3


 
 
Fig. 1: Superconducting Quantum Processing Unit and Benchmarking Circuits. (a, b) Processor schematics. In (a),
overview of the superconducting quantum processor. In (b), focus on the investigated pair (D3–C4), coupled with a
high-frequency qubit (A6) parked at its sweet spot and a low-frequency qubit (C3) at the anti-sweet spot (in black). (c–f)
Benchmarking circuits. The colored quantum states correspond to the injection (purple) and non-injection (orange) of
non-Clifford T gates. The measurement block represents the RCM protocol.
Fig. 2: Experimental approach and investigated circuits. (a) Experimental approach for magic measurement and error
mitigation. The studies of LM, M, and NLM quantum states involve: (1) preparing target states and performing standard
benchmarking protocols to extract CZ gate fidelity and readout calibration matrix Λ, (2) using Λ in classical post-
processing to obtain error-mitigated probabilities P(si|C), and (3) adjusting theoretical predictions for stabilizer entropy
and purity given the observed CZ depolarizing error in case of the M state ψ2. (b–d) Investigated circuits. The first
two experiments comprise preparation and erasure protocols, while the third involves only non-local magic, confirmed
by RDM-purity-inferred data (see Fig. 3(b)). In all panels, the depolarizing CZ error Edep. CZ
p
is accounted for at the
theoretical-prediction level.
(see Methods). This makes the error mitigation procedure
“parameter free”, as it does not require any fitting parame-
ter across a vast set of experiments, as done in other works,
such as Ref. [32].
4


State
Circuit
State
Th. Purity
Exp. Purity
Th. Magic
Exp. Magic
NL-Magic (from RDM purity)
Local Magic (LM)
Fig. 2(b)
ψ1
0.94
0.90 ± 0.04
0.48
0.38 ± 0.09
0.0888 ± 0.0004
ψ′
1
0.94
0.93 ± 0.05
0.08
0.1 ± 0.1
Non-Local (M)
Fig. 2(c)
ψ2
0.94
0.94±0.04
0.46
0.42 ± 0.09
0.19 ± 0.07
ψ′
2
0.94
1.00 ± 0.05
0.27
0.3 ± 0.1
Table 1: Comparison of purity and magic. Obtained values for states ψi (before) and ψ′
i (after) local magic erasure
for i = {1, 2}, as well as the value of non-local magic obtained from subsystem purity by tracing out qC4 qubit. The
theoretical predictions for purity and magic are calculated by considering the CZ depolarizing error and compared with
the experimental results after readout error mitigation. Details on the errors are reported in Methods.
In our hardware, CNOT is decomposed in terms of a
combination of single-qubit Hadamard gates and the CZ
gate. Motivated by the relatively larger CZ errors on the
measured purity and stabilizer entropy, we account for its
influence on the theoretical prediction side by modeling
the effects as a depolarizing channel (see Methods), with
a depolarization strength directly based on the IRB CZ
fidelity. Our approach allowing for a consistent comparison
between theoretical expectations and the experimental
outcomes, is summarized Fig. 2 (a).
Next, we focus on three specific quantum circuits
preparing LM, M and NLM states, shown in Fig. 2 (b-d).
Accounting for CZ depolarizing error at the theory level
and post-processing of readout error mitigation in concert
has been instrumental for the experimental detection of
non-local magic.
Local Magic (LM) state. We first consider a circuit
that only hosts local magic injected by a T gate, despite
the state being maximally entangled (see Fig. 2(b)). The
preparation circuit output reads ψ1 = Edep.CZ
p
[2−1/2(|00⟩+
ei π
4 |11⟩)]. Evaluation of stabilizer entropy for this state
yields M2(ψ1) ∼0.48. One removes or erase local magic in
the state by applying another T gate on the same qubit,
yielding M2(ψ′
1) ∼0.1. This constitutes a minimal example
where we are able to (almost) completely remove magic
with a local gate. We observe consistency between theoret-
ical expectations and experimental results for both purity
and stabilizer entropy within the statistical error associ-
ated with the RCM, together with the results obtained by
the measurement of RDM purity, as seen in Table 1.
Local+Non-Local Magic (M) state. We measure
the response of the quantum circuit in Fig. 2(c) for which
the output state has both local and non-local magic.
The output state of the preparation circuit reads ψ2 =
Edep.CZ
p
[2−3/2(c+
 |00⟩+ ei π
8 |10⟩

−ic−
 |01⟩+ ei π
8 |11⟩)

],
with c± = (2 ± (2 +
√
2)
1
2 )
1
2 , and stabilizer entropy is
M2(ψ2) ∼0.46. Since this state has both local and non-
local magic, one expects to be able to partially erase
magic using single-qubit gates. Numerical optimizations
yield the following local magic-erasing unitaries: UA =
Rz(α)Ry(β)Rz(γ)
and UB = Rz(δ)Ry(η)Rz(ϕ) , with
the rotation angles α = β = γ = δ = η = 0 and ϕ =
67.61◦. Experimental data strongly validates theoretical
predictions, as summarized in Tab. 1.
Non-Local
Magic
(NLM)
states.
We
con-
sider
a
two-qubit
state
of
the
form
ψ3(p,θ)
=
Edep.CZ
p
[cos(θ/2)|00⟩−isin(θ/2)|11⟩], realized by the quan-
tum circuit in Fig. 2(d). This state only hosts non-local
magic, and including the depolarizing CZ noise channel
we obtain the following closed-form expression for the sta-
bilizer entropy M2(ψ3(p, θ)) = −log2

4
 (p −1)4 cos(4θ) +
5(p −2)p((p −2)p + 2) + 7

+ log2(3(p −2)p + 4) + 3,
A systematic investigation of the stabilizer entropy as a
 
 
Fig. 3: NLM state experiment results (Fig. 2, panel (d)).
In (a), experimental raw data repeated over 7 runs for
the NML quantum state. The shadowed gray area high-
lights fluctuations between different experiments. In (b),
focus on experimental readout-error-mitigated data with
a smaller angle interval (dashed box in panel (a)) as well
as the values of non-local magic obtained by RDM purity
compared to the theoretical line of the stabilizer entropy
and RDM purity (inset) with CZ depolarizing errors taken
into account.
function of θ is reported in Fig. 3. In panel (a), the raw
experimental data for stabilizer entropy is shown for mul-
tiple independent runs. We recognize that for θ = π/2 the
resulting state is the Bell state |Ψ4⟩in Extended Data
Table 1. Theoretically, this state is expected to have van-
ishing stabilizer entropy, while for θ = π/4, we anticipate
maximum non-local magic. However, we measure a strong
asymmetry between rotations below and above π/4, with
5


considerable fluctuations, much larger than the statistical
error bars for the respective runs. This asymmetry cannot
be explained by readout and CZ depolarizing errors. For
θ > π/4, the nature of the error is yet to be addressed
thoroughly, but it is beyond the scope of our work. At this
stage, we consider the data for θ ≤π/4 and observe excel-
lent agreement between experimental data and theoretical
predictions, as shown in Fig. 3(b).
Discussions and Conclusions
 
 
Fig. 4: Quantum circuit for Local+Non-local magic quan-
tum state with CNOT gate. Panel (a): circuit representa-
tion of the sweeping protocol for empirically estimating
the optimal magic erasure angles. The minimum amount
of theoretically obtainable magic using Rz rotations is 0.29
with (γ, ϕ) = (67.5◦, 90◦). Panel (b): results, with the star
marking the values of the angles for which the state has
minimal magic. The sweeping angles method reaches the
same minimum value as theoretically predicted, although
for different angles than anticipated.
Genuine quantum advantage only arises with coexis-
tence between non-stabilizerness and entanglement, with
non-local magic capturing such an interplay [25, 48], and
here we provided its first experimental measurement on a
QPU.
Currently there is no unique way to precisely bench-
mark the performance of QPUs across the various quantum
circuit designs and error-mitigation schemes, hence the
link between magic manipulation of NISQ devices and the
physical characteristics of hardware, as well as its noise
sources, is a pressing challenge. The quantum processor
used in this work, core of the first Italian Superconduct-
ing Quantum Computing Center (Partenope), fits all the
criteria of the challenge, allowing a custom-tailored error
mitigation approach directly based on the experimental
performances of the device. This was key for the experi-
mental demonstration of local magic erasure from a given
state and non-local magic experimental observation using
subsystem purity.
Our hardware-informed noise modeling correctly iden-
tifies measurement readout and CZ depolarizing noise
as main noise sources of the QPU. Readout errors are
especially relevant for injecting local magic, whereas depo-
larizing noise keeps the non-local structure of magic intact.
Despite these two channels not being the only noise sources
in our devices, as magic measurements on the NLM exper-
iment for θ > 45◦shows, we demonstrate that addressing
the most impacting noise sources suffices to correctly char-
acterize non-local features of magic. However, quantum
devices are complex systems, and more sophisticated noise-
mitigation techniques may become necessary to account
for State Preparation and Measurement (SPAM) errors,
that arise when increasing the number of gates in circuit
preparation. Nonetheless, the ability to erase local magic
does not depend on the full knowledge of the noise channels
affecting the chip.
We present a proof-of-concept protocol showing it is
possible to empirically identify optimal unitaries that erase
local magic in situ, shown in Fig. 4. The protocol is partly
informed by theory which identifies a restricted set where
the optimal erasing unitaries lie. Then, by sweeping the
rotation angles in the relevant interval we empirically iso-
late actual gates that erases local magic, the results of
which are in Fig. 4 (b). The minimum local magic value
closely matches the theoretical expectation for the investi-
gated state, although the experimental angles are different
than the predicted ones. This implies other noise sources
affect the hardware beyond the theoretical model, and high-
lights the promise of heuristically determining the local
magic-erasing unitaries.
In conclusion, the study of local and non-local magic
resources cannot neglect the noisy nature of the hardware.
Our work opens a rich playground to benchmark and cal-
ibrate quantum devices of different architectures beyond
traditional gate fidelity protocols, and we envision these
benchmarks can be extended to other quantum platforms
as well. We also foresee the experimental accessibility of
quantum systems where non-local magic plays a role: from
violations of Bell’s inequalities in NLM states [28], to the
toy-modeling of black holes in a laboratory. The harness-
ing of non-local magic is preliminary to the experimental
capability of moving magic around the system and cleans-
ing subsystems from their local magic. With the ability
to confidently manipulate a larger number of qubits, we
anticipate the application of novel algorithms that demon-
strate the capacity to decode the Hawking radiation from
a black hole without previous knowledge of the initial
state [10, 49, 50]. The kernel of these quantum algorithms
has already inspired applications in more generic scenarios
of quantum information processing, promising exponen-
tial advantage over state-of-the-art metrology protocols
such as purity estimation [9]. We propose that with proper
knowledge of magic manipulation abilities of one’s quan-
tum device, such algorithms can be implemented on real
quantum hardware.
6


Methods
Non-local magic as a function of RDM purity
In this section, we derive the expression of non-local magic
as a function of RDM purity, valid in the case of two-qubit
states. Any pure two qubit state |ψ⟩can be written in the
following way: |ψ⟩=
√
λ
ψA
1
 ψB
1

+
√
1 −λ
ψA
2
 ψB
2

,
where {λ, 1 −λ} are called Schmidt coefficients and
{
ψX
1

,
ψX
2

} is the Schmidt basis of HX, with X ∈
{A, B}. Given this expression, the non-local magic of |ψ⟩
is equal to
M NL(|ψ⟩) = −log2
 4(λ −1)λ(1 −2λ)2 + 1

,
(4)
with states achieving M NL(|ψλ⟩) = M(|ψλ⟩) being of the
form |ψλ⟩=
√
λ |00⟩+
√
1 −λ |11⟩, and |00⟩, |11⟩being
states of the computational basis, i.e. the eigenstates of
the Z-Pauli matrix. Note that Eq. (4) reduces to the
one derived in [5] when one parametrizes the Schmidt
coefficients as {cos(θ/2), sin(θ/2)}, i.e.
M NL(θ) = log2
 8(7 + cos (4θ))−1
.
(5)
Since non-local magic depends exclusively on the Schmidt
spectrum, in the unique case of two-qubit states one is
able to measure the Schmidt coefficients by measuring a
single quantity, e.g. subsystem purity. Starting from a pure
state |ψ⟩in the Schmidt form, the purity of the RDM
ψA := TrB |ψ⟩⟨ψ| is given by P(ψA) = λ2 + (1 −λ)2 .
Inverting this relationship and substituting it in Eq. (4), we
get an explicit function of non-local magic on RDM purity:
M NL(|ψ⟩) = −log2
 4P(ψA)2 −6P(ψA) + 3

.
(6)
This method of deriving M NL remains valid also in the
presence of noise, although the expression will be different
than the one shown in Eq. (6). More specifically, the rela-
tionship between P(ψA) and λ will change according to
the action of the specific noise channel, and will depend
on the noise parameters ⃗pnoise as well. Nevertheless, again
inverting such relation and obtaining λ(P(ψA), ⃗pnoise) and
plugging it in Eq. (4) one obtains an expression of M NL as a
function of P(ψA) (and ⃗pnoise, that need to be determined
experimentally).
Randomized Clifford Measurements
experimental parameters and errors
The RCM protocol exploits the use of a randomized set of
Clifford unitaries to estimate, by sample average, the purity
and the stabilizer purity. The cardinality of the possible
N-qubit Clifford unitaries (modulo global phase U(1)) [51]
that are randomly picked from the Clifford group reads as
|CN| = |CN/U(1)| = 2N2+2N
N
Y
k=1
 4k −1

.
(7)
Since the number of possible Clifford combinations for a
single-qubit is not particularly demanding, being |C1| = 24,
in this work, we have used all the possible unitaries to exper-
imentally assess the fundamental quantities cited above
for single-qubit states. For two-qubits, instead, the num-
ber of possible products of single-qubit Clifford unitaries
dramatically increases (|C1 ⊗C1| = 576) and in general
the cardinality grows as 24N. To reduce the experimental
effort in calculating two-qubit states and purities, we have
randomly picked Nrand = 400 Clifford gates from the C2
gate set, where Nrand is the number of randomizations.
For each choice of single-qubit Clifford C, we measure
the readout probability vector P(s|C). The vector com-
ponents of P(s|C) are obtained as the number of events
ns for which the measured output corresponds to the
computational basis states represented by the bitstring
s normalized to the total number of shots measurements
Nshot, ps = ns/Nshot. The state assignment process uses
the discrimination threshold obtained by an initialization
experiment, unique for each quantum state preparation.
Since EC represents the sample mean of P(sl|C) over
the number of Clifford gates NC,
¯x = EC [x] ≡
1
NC
NC
X
i=1
xi ,
(8)
where x either represents purity P and stabilizer purity
W, the statistical sample variance is calculated in terms
of the square deviations from the mean d2
i = (xi −¯x)2 as
s2 = Var (x) = EC
h
(x −¯x)2i
≡
1
NC −1
NC
X
i=1
(xi−¯x)2. (9)
It follows that the statistical sample standard deviation
is the square root s = Std(x) =
√
s2, which represents,
as usual, the spread of the experimental measurements.
However, when taking a limited sample from a probability
distribution, an inherent error is induced by the finite sam-
pling. Therefore, we introduce the sampling error, defined
in terms of the statistical sample standard deviation s as
∆x =
s
√NC
.
(10)
Finally, given the non-linear (logarithm) function behav-
ior of our random variables P (purity) and W (stabilizer
purity), we are required to perform error propagation to
get the average and statistical sampling error of Stabilizer
R´enyi entropy and 2-R´enyi entropy. Using standard meth-
ods of error propagation, the estimator of the variance of
a function f of two random variables x and y is given by
Var[f(x, y)] ≈

∂f
∂x

¯x,¯y

2
Var(x)
+

∂f
∂y

¯x,¯y

2
Var(y) + 2
∂f
∂x
∂f
∂y

¯x,¯y
Cov(x, y) ,
(11)
which for the SRE M2 yields
Var(M2) ≈Var(W)
( ¯
W ln 2)2 + Var(P)
( ¯P ln 2)2 + 2 Cov(W, P)
¯
W ¯P(ln 2)2 . (12)
7


However, in Ref. [18], it is shown that the covariance
between P and W is exactly zero, so we can neglect that
term in the expression, finally yielding
∆M2 =
1
ln 2
s
Var(W)
NC ¯
W2 + Var(P)
NC ¯P2 .
(13)
RDM purity from global measurement data
In case of the direct method for measuring non-local
magic, we measure the subsystem purity P(ψA) with
ψA := TrB(|ψ⟩⟨ψ|) to extract the value of the Schmidt
coefficient. Analogously to the global system purity, par-
tial purity can be measured via Randomized Clifford
Measurements using the following formula [34]:
P(ψA) = EC 2NAX
sA,s′
A
(−2)−||⃗sA||2P (sA|C)P (s′
A|C) , (14)
where the authors used generic randomized unitaries to
compute this quantity. However, the same result holds if
one restricts the unitary gate set to be taken from the Clif-
ford group, as it is a unitary 3-design [52]. The prefactors
in terms of Hamming weight of strings ||⃗s|| are defined as
||⃗s||2 = Pn
i=1 si
1 ⊕si
2 where ||⃗s| where the ⊕symbol repre-
sents the modulo 2 sum or XOR between the bit strings.
Note that in the RCM protocol the expression for eval-
uating the stabilizer purity involves the prefactor ||⃗s||4,
involving XOR operations between 4 bit strings.
One recovers the subsystem probability outcomes as
the marginal probability distributions of the global mea-
surement outcomes, thereby using the same data taken to
measure the purity and magic of the global state, as seen
in the following calculation:
Pψ(s) = P(sA, sB) = Tr[ψ |sAsB⟩⟨sAsB|]
= TrA{TrB[(1A ⊗|sB⟩⟨sB|)ψ] |sA⟩⟨sA|}
= TrA[ψA |sA⟩⟨sA|] TrB[ψB |sB⟩⟨sB|]
= PψA(sA)PψB(sB) .
(15)
Therefore, summing over all possible outcomes of one
of the two qubits we reconstruct the partial probability
distribution on the other qubit as
PψA(sA) =
X
sB
P(sA, sB) .
(16)
Initialization experiment
The initialization experiment involves the preparation of
an N-qubit computational state |i⟩. We then acquire simul-
taneously a readout voltage across each qubit readout
resonator in the I, Q plane, and identify the state discrim-
ination threshold as discussed in Ref.[53] by using the
conditional probability method therein introduced. This
also allows us to obtain the readout probability matrix,
i. e. the probability to measure the state |j⟩over the com-
putational basis states as the ratio between the number
of counts in the different basis states ninit
ij
and the total
number of shots Nshot, pinit
ij
= ninit
ij /Nshot. The readout
probability matrix is finally used to calculate the read-
out fidelity per quantum circuit. In this work, we have
used Nshot = 5000 for determining the outcome probability
distributions P(sl|C) for each given Clifford pair C.
Noise analysis
In this section, we explain the main sources of noise by
which the chip is affected, and the techniques we used to
mitigate and obtain an appropriate theoretical error model
for the experimental data. We created a model without
making use of free parameters, and only using independent
benchmarking data of the quantum processor. As men-
tioned in the main text, we focused on two main sources,
namely readout error in computational basis measurements,
and depolarizing error on the CNOT (or rather, the CZ)
gate, each of which we will tackle in a separate subsection.
Readout noise
Readout error means the expected outcomes of mea-
surements do not necessarily correspond to the actual
preparation. For example, if we prepare a two qubit state
in |00⟩and we find it in |10⟩upon measurement, it means
a readout error has occurred. The readout errors we
encounter are of classical type, and come in different vari-
eties: i) uncorrelated (no cross-talk); ii) correlated, which
signals crosstalk, i.e., unwanted correlation between qubits
existing on the quantum chip.
Formally, a quantum measurement is modeled through
the
use
of
Positive-Operator
Valued
Measurements
(POVM), which are positive-semi-definite operators Πx,
one for each possible measurement outcome, that satisfy
P
x Πx = 1. The probability of getting an outcome x on a
certain state preparation ρ is then given by the Born rule,
namely px = Tr[Πxρ]. In the case of two qubits and a mea-
surement in the computational basis, we have four POVMs,
namely Mideal = (Π00, Π01, Π10, Π11)T , with Πij = |ij⟩⟨ij|.
However, in the presence of readout noise, the mea-
surement actually performed is a noisy POVMs, denoted
Mnoisy, related to the ideal one through a left-stochastic
matrix Λ, in the following way:
Mnoisy = Λ · Mideal ,
(17)
where Λ is usually referred to as calibration or noise matrix.
Practically, the presence of readout noise induces a trans-
formation on the would-be ideal outcome probabilities by
the same matrix Λ, namely pexp = Λ · pideal, due to the
linearity of the Born rule.
The calibration matrix is experimentally obtained by
preparing states in the computational basis and measuring
them in the same basis. The entries of Λ are then given
by Λij = p(i|j), namely the probability of measuring the
outcome j given that the preparation is in the state |i⟩.
In the ideal case, the calibration matrix should coincide
with the identity matrix, i.e. one should not get outcomes
different from the preparation. However, in the presence
of readout noise this is not the case.
Given the calibration matrix, one would be tempted to
just invert it to obtain the ideal probabilities in the post-
processing of the data, and to some extent, this can work
well when the objective of the experiment is the expectation
value of an observable [54]. However, this is considered bad
practice when the actual focus of the analysis is the vector
8


of outcomes probabilities, such as our case. The reason
is that the inverse of a stochastic matrix is not positive
in general; this means that applying this inverse matrix
to the probability data may yield negative, non-physical
probability vectors. To avoid this, we employ another post-
processing, least-squares measuring filter method. This
consists in computing the probabilities that minimize the
distance between the measured ones given the noise matrix.
The vectors obtained by this minimization are then used
for the subsequent analysis. More explicitly, we compute
pmit :=
argmin
p≥0,P pi=1
∥Λ · p −pexp∥2
2 .
(18)
This method is straightforward, but difficult to scale to
more than a few qubits, since in the case of correlated noise
we need to store the entire 2N × 2N calibration matrix
in memory and perform a minimization procedure over a
(2N−1)-dimensional space of probabilities. However, since
the number of qubits involved in our experiments is either
one or two, this method is easily implementable and quick.
In case of larger qubit number, other methods may be
implemented [54–60].
Depolarizing noise
On the prediction side, we account for the presence of
depolarizing noise on the CNOT gate (or rather, the CZ
since it is the native gate of our processor, which explains
the lower gate fidelity compared to the single qubit ones.
The action of the depolarizing noise channel on a state ρ
is described as follows[61]:
Edep(ρ) := pdep ρ + (1 −pdep) 1
d ,
(19)
which means that with a probability 1 −pdep the initial
state is mapped to the completely mixed state, whereas
with probability pdep the state remains unchanged. We
used the respective parameters of depolarizing noise, which
correspond exactly to the survival probability p1 of the
Interleaved Randomized Benchmarking [38] seen in Eq. S4
in Supplemental Information for each experiment.
Supplementary information.
The article is accompanied
by supplemental information.
Acknowledgements.
The authors thank Lorenzo Campos
Venuti for useful discussion, Hany Ali, Alessandro Bruno,
Johannes Hermann, and Christian Junger for support on
the gate calibrations.
Declarations
Funding
The work is supported by the PNRR MUR project
PE0000023-NQSTI and the PNRR MUR project CN
00000013-ICSC.
Author contribution
These authors contributed equally: H.G.A. and G.E..
H.G.A. and G.E. developed the experimental protocol; V.S.,
C.C., A.S. and H.G.A. characterized and calibrated the
device; V.S., H.G.A, C.C. and A.S.performed and analyzed
the experiments; G.E. and J.O. analyzed the data; G.E.
and J.O. developed the error mitigation scheme used for
data analysis. A.H. conceived and supervised the project.
All authors contributed to the interpretation of the results
and production of the paper.
9


Circuit
Qubit
FRO(%)
FRB(%)
Techo
2
(µs)
T∗
2(µs)
T1(µs)
state
M2 (= 0)
M2 (̸= 0)
Fig. 1(c)
D3
96 ± 1
99.75 ± 0.01
34 ± 2
24 ± 1
30 ± 1
|ψ0⟩
0.1 ± 0.3
|ψ1⟩
0.0 ± 0.3
0.43 ± 0.12
C4
97 ± 1
99.910 ± 0.002
38 ± 1
34 ± 4
30.0 ± 0.4
0.0 ± 0.3
0.42 ± 0.12
94 ± 1
99.925 ± 0.002
42 ± 1
21 ± 1
36 ± 2
0.0 ± 0.3
0.39 ± 0.14
Fig. 1(d)
D3
97 ± 1
99.910 ± 0.002
38 ± 1
34 ± 4
30.0 ± 0.4
|ψ2⟩
0.0 ± 0.3
0.43 ± 0.12
C4
94 ± 1
99.925 ± 0.002
42 ± 1
21 ± 1
36 ± 2
0.0 ± 0.3
0.40 ± 0.13
FRO(%)
FRB(%)
FCZ
RB(%)
CMW(%)
CZZ(kHz)
Fig. 1(e)
D3
C4
92 ± 1
99.75 ± 0.01
98 ± 2
∼0.12
∼100
|ψ3⟩
0.1 ± 0.1
0.85 ± 0.05
Fig. 1(f)
92 ± 1
99.905 ± 0.003
∼1.57
|ψ4⟩
0.2 ± 0.1
Extended Data Table 1: Experimental magic measured for the quantum states in Fig. 1. Systematic investigation of
experimental magic for single and two-qubit quantum states, for qubits D3 and C4, as a function of: the readout fidelity
FRO, the average single-qubit gates fidelity from Randomized Benchmarking FRB, relaxation, Ramsey and Echo coherence
times (T1, T ∗
2 and T Echo
2
, respectively). For two-qubit circuits, we report an estimation of the drive and ZZ crosstalk, CMV
and CZZ respectively, on the investigated pair. The final columns refers measured magic for the states after introduction
of T gates and in the circuits are denoted as |ψT
i ⟩. Discussion on error estimation is in Methods.
10


Supplemental Information for ”Experimental demonstration of
non-local magic in a superconducting quantum processor”
S1 Experimental setup
The fridge employed in this work is a dry dilution refrigerator BlueforsXLS1000SL, with minimal base temperature of
7 mK. It is equipped with microwave coaxial cables, which allow operation within the microwave frequency range (DC-
18GHz, nominally). The cryostat features four types of cryogenic lines: input and output lines for the readout, drive lines
for qubit control, and flux lines for frequency tuning with either static or pulsed external magnetic flux. Feedline and
drive lines feature a nominal attenuation of −60dB, which adds to −10dB attenuation of the line itself (stainless steel)
and infrared low-pass filters with a cutoff of about 10GHz. The flux lines are equipped with −20dB nominal attenuation,
anchored at 4K to prevent Joule heating, and two infrared low-pass filters in series of 10GHz and 1GHz. Flux lines are in
stainless steel from room temperature to the 4K plate, and in niobium titanium below 4K. This allows for reducing heat
dissipation when delivering static currents up to 40mA, used to generate magnetic flux on chip. The output lines, also
made of niobium titanium below 4K and in copper-nickel at highest temperatures, are not attenuated, and include a
10GHz low-pass filter and a Low-Noise Factory LNF-ISC double junction isolator at the mixing chamber (MXC), so that
signals from room-temperature towards the sample are attenuated nominally by a total of 40 dB. Since the output signals
of the qubits are single-photon signals, amplifiers are required. In our system, there are two amplification stages. There is
a High Electron Mobility Transistor (HEMT) with nominal amplification of 40dB on the 4K plate, and three amplifiers
at room temperature with a nominal 16dB amplification each. The cryogenic setup is shown in Figure S1. Finally, to
QCM-RF
Bias Tee
QRM-RF
QRM-RF
SPI
QCM
Fig. S1: Cryogenic setup scheme, including the attenuation scheme for the input, drive and flux lines. On the output line,
there are a dual juction isolator and an HEMT amplifier. Each line has a low-pass filter.
provide combined static and pulsed magnetic flux through the flux lines, we employ bias-tees at room temperature, where
the DC signal is generated by Qblox S4g modules (installed in a Qblox SPI-rack) and the RF signal is generated by a
Qubit Control Module (QCM). This generates output signals up to 400 MHz, and are installed in a Qblox Cluster, a
room-temperature microwave modular electronics fully interfaceable with Python packages, thanks to the open-source
package Quantify [62]. The modules used for the measurements of this work are:
11


• Qubit Readout Module RF (QRM-RF), which allows generation of output multi-tone signals for multiplexed readout
up to 18.5 GHz, and to demodulate the readout signals over a 400 MHz bandwidth;
• Qubit Control Module RF (QCM-RF), which allows output signals up to 18.5 GHz;
• Qubit Control Module (QCM), which generates pulses in the baseband regime up to 400 MHz.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of Cliffords
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
qD3 - 0  population
Fcl: 0.9971 ± 0.0001
Favg: 0.9985 ± 0.0001
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of Cliffords
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
qC4 - 0  population
Fcl: 0.9982 ± 0.0001
Favg: 0.99905 ± 0.00003
Simultaneous randomized benchmarking on qD3-qC4
(a)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of Cliffords
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
qD3 - 0  population
Fcl: 0.9981 ± 0.00004
Favg: 0.99899 ± 0.00002
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of Cliffords
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
qC4 - 0  population
Fcl: 0.9984 ± 0.0001
Favg: 0.99917 ± 0.00002
Simultaneous randomized benchmarking on qD3-qC4
(b)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of Cliffords
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
qD3 - 0  population
Fcl: 0.9978 ± 0.0001
Favg: 0.99884 ± 0.00003
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of Cliffords
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
qC4 - 0  population
Fcl: 0.9983 ± 0.0001
Favg: 0.99912 ± 0.00003
Simultaneous randomized benchmarking on qD3-qC4
(c)
Fig. S2: Simultaneous Randomized Benchmarking for single-qubit gate fidelity on qubit qD3 and qC4 for the three
proposed experiment: the RB in (a) for the LM state experiment, in (b) for the M state, and in (c) for the NLM state.
Blue scatter data corresponds to the population of the |0⟩state as a function of the number of Clifford gates in the
randomized benchmarking sequence, averaged over 50 random seeds. The solid line represents the fit function (Eq.(S1))
used for the estimation of the single-qubit randomized benchmarking average gate fidelity.
12


0
50
100
150
200
250
Number of Cliffords
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
00  population
Fcl: 0.979 ± 0.001
FCZ, naive: 0.9861 ± 0.0004
FCz, inter. : 0.991 ± 0.001
Two-qubit Interleaved CZ RB on qD3-qC4
Standard RB
IRB
(a)
0
50
100
150
200
250
Number of Cliffords
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
00  population
Fcl: 0.9767 ± 0.0003
FCZ, naive: 0.9844 ± 0.0002
FCz, inter. : 0.991 ± 0.001
Two-qubit Interleaved CZ RB on qD3-qC4
Standard RB
IRB
(b)
0
50
100
150
200
250
Number of Cliffords
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
00  population
Fcl: 0.972 ± 0.001
FCZ, naive: 0.981 ± 0.001
FCz, inter. : 0.985 ± 0.002
Two-qubit Interleaved CZ RB on qD3-qC4
Standard RB
IRB
(c)
Fig. S3: Interleaved Randomized Benchmarking for the CZ gate on qubit qD3 and qC4 for the three proposed experiment:
the CZ-IRB in (a) for the LM state experiment, in (b) for the M state, and in (c) for the NLM state. The scatter
data correspond to the population of the |00⟩state as a function of the number of Clifford gates in the randomized
benchmarking sequence, averaged over 50 random seeds. The solid line represents the fit function (Eq.(S1)) used for the
estimation of survival probabilities. Specifically, the blue line refers to the standard simultaneous RB, while the orange
one refers to the IRB, from which it is possible to estimate p0 and p1, respectively. From the two survival probabilities,
the fidelity of the CZ can be obtain according to Eq.(S4).
S2 Benchmarking protocols and experiments
S2.1 Single and two-qubit gates optimization protocols
Before the experimental measurements of magic on the investigated D3-C4 pair, we have performed: i) single- and two-
qubits gate calibrations [63, 64], ii) simultaneous readout calibration. In detail, the experimental single-qubit gate set
includes rotations Rxy(θ), where the rotation angle θ is controlled by changing the amplitude of drive DRAG (Derivative
Reduction Adiabatic Gate) pulses [43, 65, 66] with a fixed duration of 60 ns. After a rough estimation of the amplitude
required to perform a transition from the ground to the excited state of the qubits (π-pulse) with Rabi oscillations
experiments [43], we have optimized the pulses frequency by using Ramsey oscillations experiments [43], the shape through
Motzoi protocol [67] and we performed a fine tuning of the π-pulse amplitude through the flipping protocol. This sequence
of optimization steps is finally tested through simultaneous All-XY experiments, able to recover error syndromes in X-Y
gates (e.g., detuning, amplitude and DRAG errors), and eventually allowing us to correct for specific errors when they
occur [64].
13


As for the two-qubit gates calibration, we have focused on CZ gates implemented through flux-pulses able to set on
resonance the high-frequency qubit (D3) with the low-frequency qubit (C4). We used the cryoscope technique to correct for
flux pulses distortions [68], and CZ-Chevron experiments employing unipolar flux pulses to get a rough estimation of the
amplitude and the duration of the CZ flux pulses [43, 44]. Then, we have used Sudden-Net Zero (SNZ) flux pulses, whose
parameters have been optimized through conditional oscillations experiments [69] (Sec. S2). By measuring landscapes of
the conditional two-qubit phase and the leakage as a function of the amplitude and the shape of the SNZ pulses, as well
as the flux sweet spot of the qubits, we aimed at the minimum leakage and a conditional phase as close as possible to the
nominal 180◦conditional two-qubit phase [44]. Finally, we have also corrected for the single-qubit phases to enhance the
fidelity of the CZ gates [44].
The readout calibration procedure, instead, involved Single-Shot Readout (SSRO) experiments [70] as a function
of the power and the frequency of the readout tone, as well as the duration of the readout signal and the integration
time. Single-shot readout is performed suddenly before any quantum circuit implemented, and is used to identify the
discrimination threshold for the computational basis state and the calculation of the count vectors and the readout
state probability [53]. Finally, besides standard coherence times benchmarking, e.g. relaxation, Ramsey and Hahn-Echo
coherence times (T1, T ∗
2 and T2) [43], simultaneous single-qubit Randomized Benchmarking (RB) [71] and CZ Interleaved
two-qubits RB (IRB) [38, 72] were used to estimate the average Clifford gate fidelities for the two qubits and the average
CZ gate fidelity (App. S2), while SSRO experiments have been used to estimate the readout fidelity [53].
In the context of RCM, C = NN
i=1 Ci represents the tensor product of N single-qubit Clifford unitaries Ci, each
randomly sampled from the ensemble of unitaries, which includes X, Y , Z, H, and S gates, plus the trivial identity gate
I, and all 24 of their possible combinations. While X, Y and Z gates are directly related to microwave/flux pulses[43], H
and S gates are decomposed in terms of Rx, Ry, and Rz gates. For example, H is decomposed in terms of Ry(π/2)Rz(π)
rotations, while S is implemented as a Rz(π/2) pulse, where Ry(θ)≡Rxy
 θ, π
2

, Rz(θ) = e−i θ
2 Z. The T is implemented as
Rz(π/4). CNOT is implemented as CNOT1→2 = (I ⊗H) · CZ1→2 · (I ⊗H).
S2.2 Fidelity estimation
Randomized Benchmarking (RB) is a class of methods used to evaluate the fidelity of applied gates and is based on
the implementation of sequences of random gate operations [73–75]. The advantages of RB protocols are their efficient
scalability with the number of qubits n and the fact that they account for State Preparation and Measurement (SPAM)
errors. In our protocol, the RB has been implemented over the Clifford gate set. Clifford based RB has several variants.
Specifically, we focused on the Standard RB and the Interleaved RB (IRB).
S2.2.1 Single qubit Randomized Benchmaking
Standard Clifford RB is performed by initializing the qubit in the |0⟩state, followed by the application of a sequence
of Ncl random Clifford gates, and then the inverse of all applied gates. Ideally, this sequence acts as the identity gate.
However, due to gate errors, the final state will differ from the ideal one. Finally, we can thus extract the fidelity of the
gates by comparing how close the final state is to the initial one. The survival probability p can be obtained by fitting the
population of the |0⟩state as a function of the number of Clifford, using the exponential decay [76]:
F|0⟩(Ncl) = A · pNcl + B,
(S1)
where Ncl is the number of Clifford gates in the sequence. Given d = 2n as the dimensionality of the system for n qubits,
the average gate fidelity can be estimated from the survival probability as:
Favg.gate = (Fcl)
1
1.875 ,
(S2)
where
Fcl = 1 −
d −1
d
−(1 −p)

.
(S3)
This protocol was performed simultaneously on both qubits, qD3 and qC4. The single-qubit gate for each qubit was
chosen randomly and independently from the single-qubit Clifford group, i.e., the protocol required applying the product
of the single-qubit Clifford unitaries to the two-qubit register. An example of the protocol applied simultaneously on
qubits D3 and C4 is shown in Fig. S2.
S2.2.2 CZ - Interleaved Randomized Benchmarking
The Interleaved Randomized Benchmarking (IRB) is a scalable experimental protocol for estimating the average error
of individual quantum computational gates. The protocol involves interleaving random Clifford gates with the gate of
interest, i.e., the CZ gate in our case [38]. This protocol is composed of three steps [38]:
• perform standard randomized benchmarking (RB) by choosing K sequences of random gates, where the first m
gates in each sequence are selected randomly from the Clifford group, and the (m + 1)-th gate is the inverse of the
composition of the first m gates. By fitting the exponential decay, we can obtain the survival probability p0 (Eq.(S1));
14


• choose K sequences of Clifford elements where the first Clifford, in each sequence, is chosen randomly for the Clifford
group, while the second is always the CZ gate, and alternate between random Clifford and the CZ gate up to m-th
random gate. The (m + 1)-th gate is the inverse of the composition of the first m gates and the m CZ gates. As well
as for the standard RB, we can use the exponential decay fit to estimate the survival probability p1;
• estimate the fidelity for the CZ gate as follow:
FCZ,int = 1 −
d −1
d
·

1 −p1
p0

(S4)
An example of the CZ-IRB performed on D3 and C4 is shown in Fig. S3. Moreover, we performed statistical measurements
of the interleaved CZ gate fidelity, obtaining an average fidelity of (98 ± 2)%. The results are shown in Fig. S4.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Repetitions
96.0
96.5
97.0
97.5
98.0
98.5
99.0
Fidelity (%)
Fidelity: 98 ± 2 %
IRB-CZ gate statistic
Fig. S4: Statistical measurements of the interleaved CZ gate fidelity.
S2.3 Crosstalk measurements
Crosstalk phenomena refer to interactions between qubits that can introduce noise into the system, leading to errors in
algorithm implementation. Therefore, as a preliminary step, it is necessary to study the crosstalk affecting the device.
There are various types of crosstalk, but in this work, we specifically focus on microwave crosstalk and ZZ crosstalk.
S2.3.1 Microwave crosstalk
To determine the microwave crosstalk strength from one qubit to another, we send a microwave pulse to the driveline
of one qubit and measure its effect on the other qubit, referred to as the ’driven’ and ’measured’ qubit, respectively.
Specifically, we perform a Rabi experiment on the driven qubit by sending a π-pulse at the frequency of the measured
qubit and carry out a dispersive measurement on the latter. By using a sinusoidal fit, we can extract the π-pulse amplitude
obtained from the experiment, which allows us to estimate the strength of the microwave crosstalk coefficient. Specifically,
it can be estimated as:
Ci→j = Aj→j
Ai→j
tj→j
ti→j
(S5)
where Ai→j and ti→j are the amplitude and duration of the π-pulse sent on qubit i and measured on qubit j, respectively.
The microwave crosstalk matrix for the couple D3-C4 is shown in Fig. S5.
S2.3.2 ZZ crosstalk
By performing two-qubit gates, we introduce a controlled interaction between the two qubits. However, there may also be
a small undesired coupling between them, which persists even when the controlled interaction is turned off. The effect
of this interaction, known as residual ZZ coupling [68], is that the frequency of the |0⟩→|1⟩transition of one qubit
shifts depending on the state of the other. In order to estimate the streght of this interaction, we can use a Ramsey-type
experiment. Specifically, we perform a Ramsey sequence on the target qubit with an echo pulse at the midway point. In
the meanwhile, the spectator the spectator is prepared in the ground state for half of the sequence, and in the excited
state for the second half. The pulse scheme of the experiment is shown in Fig. S6.
15


1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Amplitude [V]
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Rotated transmission SR
21 [mV]
Pi-pulse amplitude: 0.26 ± 0.03 V
Cross-Rabi oscillation - drive qD3, measure qC4
(a)
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Amplitude [V]
7.475
7.500
7.525
7.550
7.575
7.600
7.625
7.650
Rotated transmission SR
21 [mV]
Pi-pulse amplitude: 2.8 ± 4.8 V
Cross-Rabi oscillation - drive qC4, measure qD3
(b)
qD3
qC4
Spectator
qD3
qC4
Target
100.00
1.57
0.12
100.00
Crosstalk matrix - Microwave
0
20
40
60
80
100
CrossMW[%]
(c)
Fig. S5: Measurement of the MW crosstalk between qD3 and qC4. In (a) and (b), the results of the Rabi protocol
performed using qD3 as the driven qubit and qC4 as the measured one, and vice versa, respectively. In (c), the MW
crosstalk matrix for qD3 and qC4. The x- and y-axis indicates the measured qubit and the driven one. The colorbar
represents the percentage of MW crosstalk.
Fig. S6: Pulse sequence for ZZ residual coupling estimation. First, a Rx(π/2) and Rx(π) gates are applied on the target
and the spectator qubit, respectively. The qubits are allowed to evolve freely for a variable delay t/2, after which a Ry(π)
and Rx(π) rotation are applied on the target and spectator qubit, respectively. After waiting again for a variable delay
t/2, a Ry(π/2) pulse is applied on the target qubit. Finally, the circuit’s output is measured.
16


0
20
40
60
80
100
Ramsey delay time [ s]
0.0
0.5
1.0
qD3 - Population 1
: 99.8 ± 0.7 kHz 
Residual ZZ qD3 - qC4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ramsey delay time [ s]
0.0
0.5
1.0
qC4 - Population 1
: 100.0 ± 0.7 kHz 
Residual ZZ qC4 - qD3
(a)
qD3
qC4
Spectator
qD3
qC4
Target
0.0
100.0
99.8
0.0
Crosstalk matrix - Residual ZZ
0
20
40
60
80
100
 [kHz]
(b)
Fig. S7: Measurement of the ZZ residual coupling between qD3 and qC4. In (a) and (b) the population of the |1⟩state
using qD3 and qC4 as target, respectively. The solid lines represent the fit function used to estimate the ZZ residual
coupling. In (c), the ZZ crosstalk matrix for qD3 and qC4. The x- and y-axis indicates the spectator and the target qubit,
respectively. The colorbar represents the shift in frequency due to the ZZ interaction.
|00 >
|01 >
|10 >
|11 >
Measured state
|00 >
|01 >
|10 >
|11 >
Prepared state
SSRO qD3-qC4
0.95
0.07
0.07
0.01
0.03
0.92
0.00
0.06
0.02
0.00
0.90
0.06
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.87
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
(a)
|00 >
|01 >
|10 >
|11 >
Measured state
|00 >
|01 >
|10 >
|11 >
Prepared state
SSRO qD3-qC4
0.95
0.05
0.06
0.00
0.02
0.92
0.00
0.07
0.03
0.00
0.91
0.05
0.00
0.03
0.02
0.88
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
(b)
|00 >
|01 >
|10 >
|11 >
Measured state
|00 >
|01 >
|10 >
|11 >
Prepared state
SSRO qD3-qC4
0.96
0.06
0.04
0.00
0.02
0.93
0.00
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.93
0.06
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.90
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
(c)
Fig. S8: Supplemental Figure – Initialization/assignment probability matrices. Initialization matrix for the three proposed
experiments: in (a) for the LM state experiment, in (b) for the M state, and in (c) for the NLM state. The x- and y-axis
indicate the measured and prepared state, respectively.
17


Computational 
basis state 
preparation
(𝐼𝑚, 𝑄𝑚)𝑘, 𝑚= {1, … , 𝑁𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑡}
Simultaneous 
single-shot 
readout
Initialization 
count 
vector 𝑛𝑖𝑗
𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡
Discrimination 
threshold 
identification
| ۧ𝑖= ⨂𝑘=1
𝑁
|
ۧ
𝜙𝑘𝜙={| ۧ
0 ,| ۧ
1 }
Initialization 
readout 
probability 
𝑝𝑖𝑗
𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡
Quantum 
circuit count 
vector 𝑛𝑖𝑗
Quantum 
circuit 
readout 
probability 𝑝𝑖𝑗
Fig. S9: Supplemental Figure - Experimental randomized protocol for magic measurements. In (a), a schematic represen-
tation of the randomized measurement protocol. In (b), the steps involved in the initialization experiment are performed
before any quantum circuit. The initialization procedure is used on one hand to calculate the readout fidelity, but most
importantly the computational basis states discrimination threshold (black dashed line in the top right inset). This allows
to determine the output of any randomized Clifford circuit performed after the preparation of a quantum state.
18


(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. S10: The measured |1⟩population as a function of the phase on qD3 on the left and on qC4 on the right for the three
proposed experiment: in (a) for the LM state experiment, in (b) for the M state, and in (c) for the NLM state. The blue
scatter data represent the measured values for the Off variant, while the orange ones the measured values for the On variant.
The solid lines represent the fit fuction used to estimate the two-qubit phase θ2Q on the left and the leakage L on the right.
19


Due to the residual ZZ interaction, the target qubit will acquire a phase. By varying the delay in the experiment,
we observe an oscillation in the target qubit population, from which it is possible to estimate the residual ZZ coupling
frequency. The ZZ-crosstalk matrix for the couple D3-C4 is shown in Fig. S7.
S2.4 Conditional oscillation
To tune up the CZ gate, it is possible to perform the conditional oscillation experiment. It can be used to measure the
conditional phase θ2Q acquired during an uncalibrated CZ gate, and to estimate the leakage L, defined as the average
probability that a random computational state leaks out of the computational subspace [77]. In the conditional oscillation
experiment, two variants of the same experiment are performed [69]. In the first variant (Off), a π/2-pulse is applied on the
target qubit, while the control qubit is left in the ground state. After that, the CZ flux pulse is applied. Finally, another
π/2-pulse is applied on the target before measuring the state of both qubits simultaneously. In the second variant (On), the
control qubit is rotated into the excited state before applying the CZ gate. Then, the control qubit is pulsed back to the
ground state before measuring both qubits. The difference in phase acquired by the target in the On and Off variants yields
θ2Q, while the population difference on the control, defined as the missing fraction m, allows us to estimate the leakage as
L = m/2. In order to optimize θ2Q, i.e. to have it equal to π, and to minimize the leakage L, the flux pulse amplitude and
duration are changed. An example of the protocol performed for the CZ between D3 and C4 is shown in Fig. S10.
S3 Local magic distillation lemma
Lemma 1 (Local magic distillation). Given a state |ψ⟩∈H = HA ⊗HB, an ancillary system in |0⟩, and a Clifford unitary
C such that
C(|ψ⟩⊗|0⟩) = |ψ′⟩⊗|ϕ⟩,
(S6)
with M2(|ϕ⟩) > M L(ψ), then C does not allow a decomposition in local unitary operators on HA ⊗HB, namely it cannot
be of the form C = CA ⊗CBC or C = CB ⊗CAC.
Proof Since C ∈C, then M2(
ψ′
⊗|ϕ⟩) = M2(|ψ⟩). Since M2 is additive, it holds that
M2(
ψ′
) + M2(|ϕ⟩) = M2(|ψ⟩)
= MNL(|ψ⟩) + ML(|ψ⟩) =⇒M2
 ψ′
= MNL(|ψ⟩) + ML(|ψ⟩) −M2(|ϕ⟩)
(S7)
by hypothesis, M2(|ϕ⟩) > ML(|ψ⟩), hence ML(|ψ⟩) −M2(|ϕ⟩) < 0: thus we have
M2(
ψ′
) < MNL(|ψ⟩) =
min
UA,UB
M2[(UA ⊗UB) |ψ⟩]
(S8)
proving that
ψ′
cannot be the output of the product of local unitaries on A and B.
□
20


References
[1] Aaronson, S. & Gottesman, D. Improved simulation of stabilizer circuits. Phys. Rev. A 70, 052328 (2004). URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.70.052328.
[2] Bravyi, S. & Kitaev, A. Universal quantum computation with ideal Clifford gates and noisy ancillas. Physical Review
A 71, 022316 (2005).
[3] Veitch, V., Hamed Mousavian, S. A., Gottesman, D. & Emerson, J. The resource theory of stabilizer quantum
computation. New Journal of Physics 16, 013009 (2014).
[4] Li, G.-C. et al. Invested and potential magic resources in measurement-based quantum computation. Phys. Rev. Lett.
135, 160203 (2025). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/4yyv-hggz.
[5] Qian, D. & Wang, J. Quantum nonlocal nonstabilizerness. Physical Review A 111, 052443 (2025).
[6] Leone, L., Oliviero, S. F. E., Zhou, Y. & Hamma, A. Quantum chaos is quantum. Quantum 5, 453 (2021).
[7] Zhou, S., Yang, Z.-C., Hamma, A. & Chamon, C. Single T gate in a Clifford circuit drives transition to universal
entanglement spectrum statistics. SciPost Phys. 9, 087 (2020). URL https://scipost.org/10.21468/SciPostPhys.9.6.087.
[8] True, S. & Hamma, A. Transitions in entanglement complexity in random circuits. Quantum 6, 818 (2022).
[9] Leone, L., Oliviero, S. F. E., Esposito, G. & Hamma, A. Phase transition in stabilizer entropy and efficient purity
estimation. Physical Review A 109, 032403 (2024).
[10] Oliviero, S. F. E., Leone, L., Lloyd, S. & Hamma, A. Unscrambling quantum information with Clifford decoders.
Physical Review Letters 132, 080402 (2024).
[11] Feynman, R. P. Simulating physics with computers. International Journal of Theoretical Physics 21, 467–488 (1982).
[12] Shor, P. W. Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete logarithms on a quantum computer.
SIAM Journal on Computing 26, 1484–1509 (1997).
[13] Harrow, A. W., Hassidim, A. & Lloyd, S. Quantum algorithm for linear systems of equations. Physical Review
Letters 103, 150502 (2009).
[14] Lloyd, S. Universal quantum simulators. Science 273, 1073–1078 (1996).
[15] Grover, L. K. Quantum mechanics helps in searching for a needle in a haystack. Physical Review Letters 79, 325–328
(1997).
[16] Gottesman, D. The Heisenberg representation of quantum computers (1998). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/
9807006. arXiv:quant-ph/9807006.
[17] Howard, M. & Campbell, E. Application of a resource theory for magic states to fault-tolerant quantum computing.
Physical Review Letters 118, 090501 (2017).
[18] Iannotti, D., Esposito, G., Campos Venuti, L. & Hamma, A. Entanglement and Stabilizer entropies of random
bipartite pure quantum states. Quantum 9, 1797 (2025). URL https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2025-07-21-1797.
[19] Tirrito, E. et al. Quantifying nonstabilizerness through entanglement spectrum flatness. Phys. Rev. A 109, L040401
(2024). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.109.L040401.
[20] Szombathy, D., Valli, A., Moca, C. P., Farkas, L. & Zar´and, G. Independent stabilizer r´enyi entropy and entanglement
fluctuations in random unitary circuits (2025). URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2501.11489. ArXiv:2501.11489 [quant-ph].
[21] Korbany, D. A., Gullans, M. J. & Piroli, L. Long-range nonstabilizerness and phases of matter. Phys. Rev. Lett. 135,
160404 (2025). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/1hlj-h6t9.
[22] Odavi´c, J., Viscardi, M. & Hamma, A. Stabilizer entropy in nonintegrable quantum evolutions. Physical Review B
112, 104301 (2025).
[23] Cao, C. et al. Gravitational back-reaction is magical (2024). URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07056.
21


[24] Preskill, J. Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond. Quantum 2, 79 (2018). URL https://doi.org/10.22331
/q-2018-08-06-79.
[25] Odavi´c, J. et al. Complexity of frustration: A new source of non-local non-stabilizerness. SciPost Physics 15, 131
(2023).
[26] Wills, A., Hsieh, M.-H. & Yamasaki, H. Constant-overhead magic state distillation. Nature Physics (2025). URL
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-025-03026-0.
[27] Sales Rodriguez, P. et al. Experimental demonstration of logical magic state distillation. Nature (2025). URL
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09367-3.
[28] Cusumano, S. et al. Non-stabilizerness and violations of CHSH inequalities (2025). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504
.03351. arXiv:2504.03351.
[29] Pastawski, F., Yoshida, B., Harlow, D. & Preskill, J. Holographic quantum error-correcting codes: toy models for the
bulk/boundary correspondence. Journal of High Energy Physics 2015, 149 (2015).
[30] Leone, L., Oliviero, S. F. & Hamma, A. Stabilizer Renyi entropy. Physical Review Letters 128, 050402 (2022).
[31] Leone, L. & Bittel, L. Stabilizer entropies are monotones for magic-state resource theory. Physical Review A 110,
L040403 (2024).
[32] Oliviero, S. F. E., Leone, L., Hamma, A. & Lloyd, S. Measuring magic on a quantum processor. npj Quantum
Information 8, 1–8 (2022). URL https://www.nature.com/articles/s41534-022-00666-5.
[33] Elben, A. et al. The randomized measurement toolbox. Nature Reviews Physics 5, 9–24 (2022).
[34] Brydges, T. et al. Probing R´enyi entanglement entropy via randomized measurements. Science 364, 260–263 (2019).
URL https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aau4963.
[35] Cai, Z. et al. Quantum error mitigation. Rev. Mod. Phys. 95, 045005 (2023). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103
/RevModPhys.95.045005.
[36] Ahmad, H. G. et al. Mitigating errors on superconducting quantum processors through fuzzy clustering. Advanced
Quantum Technologies 7, 2300400 (2024).
[37] Magesan, E., Gambetta, J. M. & Emerson, J. Scalable and robust randomized benchmarking of quantum processes.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 180504 (2011). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.180504.
[38] Magesan, E. et al. Efficient measurement of quantum gate error by interleaved randomized benchmarking. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 109, 080505 (2012). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.080505.
[39] Chen, J., Ding, D. & Huang, C. Randomized benchmarking beyond groups. PRX Quantum 3, 030320 (2022). URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.030320.
[40] Cross, A. W., Magesan, E., Bishop, L. S., Smolin, J. A. & Gambetta, J. M. Scalable randomised benchmarking of
non-Clifford gates. npj Quantum Information 2, 16012 (2016).
[41] Helsen, J., Xue, X., Vandersypen, L. M. K. & Wehner, S. A new class of efficient randomized benchmarking protocols.
npj Quantum Information 5, 71 (2019).
[42] DiCarlo, L. et al. Demonstration of two-qubit algorithms with a superconducting quantum processor. Nature 460,
240–244 (2009). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08121.
[43] Krantz, P. et al. A quantum engineer’s guide to superconducting qubits. Applied Physics Reviews 6, 021318 (2019).
[44] Negˆırneac, V. et al. High-fidelity controlled-z gate with maximal intermediate leakage operating at the speed limit in
a superconducting quantum processor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 220502 (2021). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/P
hysRevLett.126.220502.
[45] Koch, J. et al. Charge-insensitive qubit design derived from the cooper pair box. Phys. Rev. A 76, 042319 (2007).
URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.76.042319.
22


[46] Zhao, P. et al. Quantum crosstalk analysis for simultaneous gate operations on superconducting qubits. PRX
Quantum 3, 020301 (2022). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.020301.
[47] Ketterer, A. & Wellens, T. Characterizing crosstalk of superconducting transmon processors. Phys. Rev. Appl. 20,
034065 (2023). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.20.034065.
[48] Cao, C. Non-trivial area operators require non-local magic. Journal of High Energy Physics 2024, 105 (2024).
[49] Leone, L., Oliviero, S. F. E., Lloyd, S. & Hamma, A. Learning efficient decoders for quasi-chaotic quantum scramblers.
Physical Review A 109, 022429 (2024).
[50] Leone, L., Oliviero, S. F. E., Piemontese, S., True, S. & Hamma, A. Retrieving information from a black hole using
quantum machine learning. Physical Review A 106, 062434 (2022).
[51] Grier, D. & Schaeffer, L. The classification of Clifford gates over qubits. Quantum 6, 734 (2022). URL https:
//quantum-journal.org/papers/q-2022-06-13-734/.
[52] Webb, Z. The Clifford group forms a unitary 3-design. Quantum Information and Computation 16, 1379–1400 (2016).
[53] Stasino, V. et al. Implementation and readout of maximally entangled two-qubit gates quantum circuits in a
superconducting quantum processor. Journal of Superconductivity and Novel Magnetism 38, 129 (2025). URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10948-025-06968-x.
[54] Bravyi, S., Sheldon, S., Kandala, A., Mckay, D. C. & Gambetta, J. M. Mitigating measurement errors in multiqubit
experiments. Physical Review A 103, 042605 (2021). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.103.042605.
[55] Kandala, A. et al. Error mitigation extends the computational reach of a noisy quantum processor. Nature 567,
491–495 (2019). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1040-7.
[56] Song, C. et al. Quantum computation with universal error mitigation on a superconducting quantum processor.
Science Advances 5, eaaw5686 (2019).
[57] Smith, A. W. R., Khosla, K. E., Self, C. N. & Kim, M. S. Qubit readout error mitigation with bit-flip averaging.
Science Advances 7, eabi8009 (2021).
[58] van den Berg, E., Minev, Z. K. & Temme, K. Model-free readout-error mitigation for quantum expectation values.
Phys. Rev. A 105, 032620 (2022). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.105.032620.
[59] Maciejewski, F. B., Zimbor´as, Z. & Oszmaniec, M. Mitigation of readout noise in near-term quantum devices by
classical post-processing based on detector tomography. Quantum 4, 257 (2020).
[60] Cosco, F., Plastina, F. & Lo Gullo, N. Bayesian mitigation of measurement errors in multiqubit experiments. Physical
Review A 112, 042621 (2025).
[61] Nielsen, M. A. & Chuang, I. L. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 2010). URL https://books.google.it/books?id=-s4DEy7o-a0C.
[62] Software package quantify. URL https://quantify-os.org/.
[63] Lucero, E. et al. High-fidelity gates in a single Josephson qubit. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 247001 (2008). URL
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.247001.
[64] Reed, M. Entanglement and Quantum Error Correction with Superconducting Qubits (PhD Thesis). URL https:
//books.google.it/books?id=7mORBQAAQBAJ.
[65] Babu, A. P., Tuorila, J. & Ala-Nissila, T. State leakage during fast decay and control of a superconducting transmon
qubit. npj Quantum Information 7, 30 (2021). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-020-00357-z.
[66] Werninghaus, M. et al. Leakage reduction in fast superconducting qubit gates via optimal control. npj Quantum
Information 7, 14 (2021). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-020-00346-2.
[67] Motzoi, F., Gambetta, J. M., Rebentrost, P. & Wilhelm, F. K. Simple pulses for elimination of leakage in weakly
nonlinear qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 110501 (2009). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.110501.
23


[68] Rol, M. A. et al. Time-domain characterization and correction of on-chip distortion of control pulses in a quantum
processor. Applied Physics Letters 116, 054001 (2020).
[69] Rol, M. A. et al. Fast, high-fidelity conditional-phase gate exploiting leakage interference in weakly anharmonic
superconducting qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 120502 (2019). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.1
23.120502.
[70] Mallet, F. et al. Single-shot qubit readout in circuit quantum electrodynamics. Nature Physics 5, 791–795 (2009).
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys1400.
[71] Gambetta, J. M. et al. Characterization of addressability by simultaneous randomized benchmarking. Physical
Review Letters 109 (2012). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.240504.
[72] C´orcoles, A. D. et al. Process verification of two-qubit quantum gates by randomized benchmarking. Phys. Rev. A
87, 030301 (2013). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.87.030301.
[73] Hashim, A. et al. Practical introduction to benchmarking and characterization of quantum computers. PRX Quantum
6, 030202 (2025). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PRXQuantum.6.030202.
[74] Helsen, J., Roth, I., Onorati, E., Werner, A. & Eisert, J. General framework for randomized benchmarking. PRX
Quantum 3, 020357 (2022). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.020357.
[75] Proctor, T. et al. Scalable randomized benchmarking of quantum computers using mirror circuits. Phys. Rev. Lett.
129, 150502 (2022). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.129.150502.
[76] Epstein, J. M., Cross, A. W., Magesan, E. & Gambetta, J. M. Investigating the limits of randomized benchmarking
protocols. Phys. Rev. A 89, 062321 (2014). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.89.062321.
[77] Wood, C. J. & Gambetta, J. M. Quantification and characterization of leakage errors. Phys. Rev. A 97, 032306
(2018). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.97.032306.
24
