1
Division-based Receiver-agnostic RFF Identification
in WiFi Systems
Xuan Yang, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Dongming Li, Member, IEEE, Dong Wei, Meng Zhang
Abstract—In physical-layer security schemes, radio frequency
fingerprint (RFF) identification of WiFi devices is susceptible to
receiver differences, which can significantly degrade classification
performance when a model is trained on one receiver but tested
on another. Consequently, the receiver-agnostic physical-layer
identification of WiFi devices remains an important research
challenge. Recent studies have addressed this issue by either
training on signals collected from multiple receivers to extract
receiver-agnostic RFF features, or by employing calibration
processes to enhance classification accuracy. However, these
approaches introduce substantial computational overhead. In
this paper, we propose a division-based receiver-agnostic RFF
extraction method for WiFi systems, which removes the receivers’
effects by dividing different preambles in the frequency domain.
The proposed method requires only a single receiver for training
and does not rely on additional calibration or stacking processes.
First, for flat fading channel scenarios, the legacy short training
field (L-STF) and legacy long training field (L-LTF) of the
unknown device are divided by those of the reference device
in the frequency domain. The receiver-dependent effects can be
eliminated with the requirement of only a single receiver for
training, and the higher-dimensional RFF features can be ex-
tracted. Second, for frequency-selective fading channel scenarios,
the high-throughput long training field (HT-LTF) is divided by
the L-LTF in the frequency domain. Only a single receiver is re-
quired for training and the higher-dimensional RFF features that
are both channel-invariant and receiver-agnostic are extracted.
Finally, simulation and experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed method effectively mitigate the impacts of channel
variations and receiver differences. The classification results
show that, even when training on a single receiver and testing
on a different one, the proposed method achieves classification
accuracy improvements of 15.5% and 28.45% over the state-
of-the-art approach in flat fading and frequency-selective fading
channel scenarios, respectively.
Index Terms—WiFi, RF fingerprint, channel robust, receiver-
agnostic, reference device, division, deep learning
I. INTRODUCTION
O
VER the past several decades, the rapid development
of WiFi devices has changed various aspects of daily
life. As the number of WiFi devices continues growing,
ensuring secure WiFi communications has become increas-
ingly important [1]. Traditionally, wireless system security is
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication.
Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may
no longer be accessible. This work was partially supported by the Natural
Science Funding of Jiangsu Province under Grant No. BK20252011, and the
Big Data Computing Center of Southeast University (Corresponding author:
Dongming Li.)
X.
Yang
and
D.
Li
are
with
School
of
Cyber
Science
and
Engineering,
Southeast
University,
Nanjing,
211189,
China.
(email:
xuan yang@seu.edu.cn; lidm@seu.edu.cn)
D. Wei and M. Zhang are with the Institute of Information Engineer-
ing, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China (e-mail: wei-
dong@iie.ac.cn; zhangmeng@iie.ac.cn).
achieved through encryption algorithms and security protocols.
However, with the rise of computational power and the advent
of quantum computing, security architectures that are based on
computational complexity face growing threats [2], because
such systems can be easily cracked by quantum computing.
Radio frequency fingerprint (RFF) identification is a promis-
ing technology for device identification, which does not rely
on computational complexity and can enhance authentica-
tion security. The transmitted signal of a device is inher-
ently affected by various hardware imperfections, such as in-
phase/quadrature (IQ) direct current (DC) offset, IQ imbal-
ance, imperfect low-pass filtering, and power amplifier (PA)
nonlinearity, all of which result in a distorted signal [3]. These
unique hardware impairments, collectively referred to as RFF,
can be extracted from the distorted signal. Similar to a human
fingerprint, the RFF is extractable, unique, and invariant, mak-
ing it a reliable feature for achieving authentication security
[4].
Several key challenges must be addressed to enable the
practical deployment of RFF identification systems. First,
wireless channel effects can distort the transmitted signal.
When the training and test sets are collected from different
locations or at different times, classification accuracy can
degrade substantially. To mitigate this issue, researchers have
proposed methods to extract inherent RFF features [5]–[9],
which are independent of channel effects. Additionally, chan-
nel estimation and compensation techniques [10], [11], as well
as filtering based approaches [3], [12]–[14], have been devel-
oped to directly counteract channel effects. However, channel
estimation and compensation may inevitably alter the original
RFF, while the filtering based approaches face difficulties in
accurately determining the passband and stopband. Moreover,
by leveraging the properties of channel coherence time [15]–
[18] and coherence bandwidth [19]–[21], signal processing
techniques based on the convolution model can be applied to
mitigate channel distortions. Furthermore, data augmentation
methods [16], [22]–[24] can enhance classification accuracy,
although they typically incur increased training overhead.
Second, the transmitted signal is also influenced by the re-
ceiver’s RFF, leading to degraded classification accuracy when
the receiver changes. Several neural network based methods
[25]–[35] have been proposed to extract receiver-agnostic RFF
features. However, training a receiver-agnostic RFF feature
extractor typically requires either collecting training samples
from multiple receivers or performing a calibration process
when deploying on a new receiver. Both approaches are time-
consuming. To address this issue, the authors in [15], [16] pro-
posed a division-based RFF extraction method that separates
arXiv:2511.15458v1  [eess.SP]  19 Nov 2025


2
the short and long preambles in the frequency domain to obtain
receiver-agnostic features. However, this method can extract
only 12-dimensional RFF features, as the short preamble
in WiFi and dedicated short-range communication (DSRC)
frames occupies just 12 subcarriers, which limits classification
performance. Additionally, the method in [15], [16] relies on a
stacking process [36], where adjacent frames are combined for
denoising and improved classification accuracy. As adjacent
frames may originate from different devices, the stacking
process is difficult to implement reliably in practice. Therefore,
achieving high classification accuracy with training on only a
single receiver while eliminating the requirements of stacking
and calibration processes deserves further investigation.
Although the afore-mentioned research progress, the ex-
isting studies on receiver-agnostic RFF identification have
the following drawbacks: (1) The training process typically
requires multiple receivers, making both data collection and
classifier training time-consuming. (2) A calibration process
is needed when deploying on a new receiver, introducing
additional overhead. (3) Only low dimensional RFF features
are extracted, leading to reduced classification accuracy. (4)
A stacking process is often required, which causes delays
in delivering the final identification results. To address these
limitations and mitigate the adverse receiver effects, we model
the adverse receiver effects and propose a division-based
receiver-agnostic RFF identification method. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work that eliminates the need for
multiple receivers, the calibration process, and the stacking
process, while enabling the extraction of high dimensional
RFF features to improve classification accuracy. The main
contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
1. For flat fading channel scenarios, the legacy short training
field (L-STF) and legacy long training field (L-LTF) of the
unknown device are divided by those of the reference device
in the frequency domain. The receiver-dependent effects can
be eliminated with the requirement of only a single receiver
for training, and the higher-dimensional RFF features can be
extracted.
2. For frequency-selective fading channel scenarios, the
aforementioned reference device based approach fails to fully
mitigate channel effects. To address this issue, the high-
throughput long training field (HT-LTF) is divided by the
L-LTF in the frequency domain. This approach operates
without a reference device, requires only a single receiver
for training, extracts higher-dimensional RFF features that
are both channel-invariant and receiver-agnostic, and achieves
high classification accuracy.
3. Extensive experiments are conducted on commercial
WiFi devices, demonstrating that by dividing different pream-
bles in the frequency domain, the adverse receiver effects can
be removed, without requiring multiple receivers, stacking,
or calibration processes. Specifically, the proposed method
achieves classification accuracies of up to 98.47% in the flat
fading channel scenario and 94.91% in the frequency-selective
fading channel scenario, even when the receiver changes.
Similar to existing works such as [15], [16], [32], [37], [38],
this paper primarily focuses on closed-set classification, where
all test devices are known during the training stage. For open-
set classification, in which rogue devices may appear during
the testing stage, readers are recommended to refer to [39],
[40].
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section
II provides an overview of the related work in this field.
Section III elaborates on WiFi signal preprocessing. Section IV
presents the proposed receiver-agnostic RFF feature extraction
and identification methods. Section V evaluates the proposed
methods through experimental analysis. Finally, Section VI
concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Since channel variations and receiver differences are the two
main challenges in RFF identification, this section primarily
focuses on addressing these two issues.
A. Channel Robust RFF identification
Since wireless signals propagate through open-air envi-
ronments, removing channel effects is essential to obtain
environment-independent RFF features. The inherent RFF,
such as carrier frequency offset (CFO) [5]–[7], is assumed to
be channel-independent and can be extracted for classification
purposes. However, long-term experiments have shown that
the CFO characteristic is unstable over time, and the CFO
characteristic is also prone to be affected by the temperature
of the crystal oscillator [41]. Channel estimation and com-
pensation methods [10], [11] have been employed to mitigate
channel effects and derive channel-robust RFF. However, the
channel estimation and compensation process may uninten-
tionally impair the RFF features, leading to lower classification
accuracy. Under the assumption that multipath signals have
higher energy in the taps with smaller delay, some filtering
based methods are designed to extract RFF features [3], [12]–
[14]. Additionally, division-based RFF extraction methods,
exploiting the characteristics of channel coherent time [15]–
[18] and channel coherent bandwidth [19]–[21], have been
proposed to extract channel-independent RFF. Moreover, the
authors in [42], [43] compensated channel effects by op-
timizing the digital finite impulse response (FIR) filter on
the transmitter side. Furthermore, data augmentation methods
can be utilized to achieve higher classification accuracy [16],
[22]–[24], though they lead to significantly increased training
overhead.
B. Receiver-agnostic RFF Identification
After the transmitted signal is received by the receiver,
the transmitter’s RFF features are also influenced by the
receiver’s characteristics. Since receiver differences decrease
classification accuracy [44], [45], handling receiver impacts
is crucial, and has been explored in several studies. Var-
ious neural network based methods, such as convolutional
neural networks (CNN) [27], [34], Siamese networks [29],
simple Siamese [30], generative adversarial networks (GAN)
[31], [35], adversarial training [32], deep adversarial neural
networks (DANN) [28], [33], transfer learning [25], and
deep metric learning [26], have been utilized to tackle this


3
t1
t10
t2
t7 t8
t3
t5
t4
t6
t9
CP
L-STF1
Data
L-LTF2
L-STF2
Short Preamble
Long Preamble
L-LTF1
Preamble
10灤1.6μs=16μs
3.2μs+2灤6.4μs=16μs
Fig. 1: Non-HT PPDU structure.
…
Legacy Preamble
8μs
L-STF
HT Preamble
L-SIG
L-LTF
HT-
SIG1
HT-
SIG2
HT-
STF
HT-
LTF1
HT-
LTFN
HT Data
4μs
8μs
4μs
4μs
4μs
4μs
4μs
Fig. 2: HT-MF PPDU structure.
problem. To enable the neural network to extract receiver-
agnostic RFF features, many studies require signals received
from multiple receivers [30]–[33], [46], which increases the
overhead in the signal collection process. Furthermore, for
domain adaptation and enhancing classification accuracy, a
calibration process involving labeled or unlabeled data from
the new receiver is required in [25]–[30], [32]–[35], [47], [48].
Since the neural network needs to be recalibrated for each
new receiver, calibration-based methods are time consuming.
Alternatively, instead of using neural networks, the authors in
[49] proposed a joint channel and RFF estimation method that
accounts for receiver effects by exploiting wave propagation
theory and a compressive sensing linear solution. However,
this approach requires receiver calibration and prior knowledge
of the transmitter’s precise location, limiting its universality.
The division-based RFF extraction methods [15], [16], [18],
which do not require training data collected from multiple re-
ceivers or a calibration process, have been theoretically proven
to mitigate the adverse receiver effects [15]. However, since
the adjacent L-LTF parts are similar, the features extracted
by dividing these two parts are susceptible to noise effects.
These adverse effects are also observed in [18], where a mul-
tiple discriminant analysis/maximum likelihood (MDA/ML)
classifier is employed for classification. By dividing the short
preamble from the long preamble in the frequency domain,
the channel and receiver impacts can be eliminated [15], [16].
Nevertheless, since the short preambles in WiFi [16] and
DSRC [15] systems occupy only 12 subcarriers, the extracted
RFF features are limited to just 12 dimensions, which leads to
lower classification accuracy. Moreover, as the RFF features
of the short preamble and long preamble are similar, the
extracted features in [15], [16] are unstable and vulnerable
to noise, with the stacking process being required to improve
accuracy. However, the stacking process is challenging to
implement since adjacent frames may originate from different
devices. Furthermore, while the effectiveness of the receiver-
agnostic RFF extraction method in [15] has been demonstrated
theoretically, its performance in real-world scenarios deserves
verification.
The related works in the receiver-agnostic research field
TABLE I: Related Work
Paper
Need Multiple
Receivers?
Need Calibration
Process?
Method
[33]
Yes
Yes
DANN
[30]
Yes
Yes
SimSiam
[32]
Yes
Yes
Adversarial Training
[46]
Yes
No
Loss Function Design
[31]
Yes
No
GAN
[47]
No
Yes
Transform Network
[25]
No
Yes
Transfer Learning
[26]
No
Yes
Deep Metric Learning
[28]
No
Yes
DANN
[27]
No
Yes
CNN
[29]
No
Yes
Siamese
[34]
No
Yes
CNN
[48]
No
Yes
Adaptive Pseudo-labeling
[35]
No
Yes
Dual Transfer GAN
[49]
No
Yes
Compressive Sensing
[15]
No
No
Division, Random Forest
[16]
No
No
Division, CNN
[18]
No
No
Division, MDA/ML
Ours
No
No
Division, InceptionTime
are summarized in Table I. It can be found that most of the
existing works need either multiple receivers or the calibration
process, or both simultaneously. Only a few works [15],
[16], [18] require neither multiple receivers nor calibration
process. Most of these existing works [16], [18] are de-
signed to remove channel effects and mitigate the receiver’s
effects inadvertently. Only one of these existing works [15]
theoretically demonstrated a division-based receiver-agnostic
RFF extraction method, the real-world performance is under
verification.
III. WIFI FRAME STRUCTURE AND SIGNAL
PREPROCESSING
To obtain receiver-agnostic RFF features, signal preprocess-
ing is essential. In this section, WiFi frame structure and signal
preprocessing are introduced in detail, while the signal prepro-
cessing involves signal detection, frame synchronization, and
CFO compensation.
A. WiFi Frame Structure
The physical layer protocol data unit (PPDU) formats
of non-high-throughput (non-HT) and high-throughput mixed


4
format (HT-MF), shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, are primarily
utilized for RFF extraction in this work. In Fig. 1, the non-HT
frame consists of a preamble and a data portion. The preamble,
which is invariant and can be used for RFF extraction, includes
ten repeated short training symbols, i.e., the legacy short train-
ing field (L-STF) part, a cyclic prefix (CP), and two repeated
long training symbols, i.e., the L-LTF part. The preamble is
mainly used for signal synchronization and channel estimation.
The L-STF part occupies 12 subcarriers and lasts 8 µs in the
time domain, corresponding to 160 samples at a sampling rate
of 20 Msps. The L-LTF part occupies 52 subcarriers, and the
CP lasts 1.6 µs, while each of the replicated symbols lasts
3.2 µs. Thus, at a sampling rate of 20 Msps, the CP part
contains 32 samples, and each long training symbol contains
64 samples. The signal duration used for fast Fourier transform
(FFT) is 3.2 µs or 64 samples at the 20 Msps sampling rate.
We define the 17th to the 80th samples and the 81st to the
144th samples of the L-STF part as L-STF1 and L-STF2,
respectively. Similarly, the 33rd to the 96th samples and the
97th to the 160th samples of the L-LTF part are denoted as L-
LTF1 and L-LTF2, respectively. Since L-STF1 and L-STF2 are
identical, and L-LTF1 and L-LTF2 are also identical, L-STF1
and L-STF2 can be combined to reduce the adverse effects of
noise. The same operation is applied to L-LTF1 and L-LTF2.
In Fig. 2, the HT-MF frame consists of a legacy preamble,
an HT preamble, and a data portion. The legacy preamble of
the HT-MF frame is identical to that of the non-HT frame.
In the HT preamble, the number of HT-LTF may vary. Each
HT-LTF occupies 54 subcarriers and contains 80 samples at a
sampling rate of 20 Msps. Since the HT-LTF part is invariant,
it can be used for RFF extraction. To avoid inter-symbol
interference, the 17th to the 80th samples of the HT-LTF part,
denoted as HT-LTF1, are used for RFF extraction.
B. Signal Detection
In this procedure, the signal’s energy is compared with a
threshold T, which should be set according to real world
conditions. The equivalent baseband signal can be denoted as
y (n), where n = 1, 2, ..., N, with N representing the length of
samples. The number of samples utilized for the signal energy
calculation is denoted as W. In the k-th detection round, the
coarse signal starting point is detected when the following
condition is met
E =
W
X
w=1
|y ((k −1) W + w)| > T.
(1)
It can be obtained that the starting point is approximate n0 =
(k −1) W, since the beginning of the signal causes the value
of E to exceed the threshold T.
C. Frame Synchronization
The correlation-based method is used for frame synchro-
nization. The ideal signal of the L-LTF part is generated offline
and can be represented as L (n), n = 1, ..., LL, with LL
denoting the length of the L-LTF part. The starting point of
the L-LTF part can be obtained as
k0 = arg max
k
k+LL−1
X
n=k
y (n0 + n)L∗(n −k + 1) , k = 1, ..., K,
(2)
where (·)∗denotes the conjugate operation and K is the search
length. Then, the starting point of the frame can be obtained
according to the frame structure as n1 = k0 −160 under a
sampling rate of 20 Msps, since there are 160 samples between
the starting point of the frame and the starting point of the L-
LTF part.
D. CFO Compensation
The discrepancy between the transmitter’s and receiver’s
central carrier frequencies results in the CFO. Ignoring channel
effects and additive noise, the signal affected by the CFO can
be expressed as
y(n) = x (n) ej2π(f1−f2)t = x(n)ej2π∆fnTs,
(3)
where x (n) is the transmitted baseband signal, and f1 and
f2 are the carrier frequencies of the transmitter and receiver,
respectively. The CFO can be estimated using the duplicate
symbols of the L-STF part as
ˆf =
1
2πTSD∠
8D+nS−1
X
n=nS
y∗(n1 + n) y (n1 + n + D),
(4)
where D is the symbol length of L-STF, and nS is the starting
point used for the CFO estimation process, where 0 ≤nS ≤
D. TS is the sampling rate, and ∠· represents taking the phase
of a complex number. There are totally eight repeated short
training symbols utilized for CFO estimation. The signal after
CFO compensation can be expressed as
y1 (n) = y (n) e−j2π b
fnTS ≈x (n) .
(5)
To compensate for the CFO more effectively, a fine CFO
compensation method can be adopted using the duplicated
structure of the L-LTF. This process is similar to the CFO
compensation process with the L-STF part, and the detailed
description is omitted for brevity.
IV. RFF EXTRACTION AND IDENTIFICATION
The RFF extraction method for flat fading channel and
frequency-selective fading channel scenarios is proposed.
For flat fading channel scenarios, a reference device based,
receiver-agnostic RFF identification method, referred to as the
RD method, is designed to mitigate the receiver’s RFF effects.
For frequency-selective fading channel scenarios, a division-
based receiver-agnostic RFF identification method, referred to
as the HL method, is proposed to remove both the channel and
the receiver’s RFF effects, without the need for a reference
device.


5
Step 1
Step 2
Step 1
Step 2
Training
Testing
Training  Neural 
Network
Trained Neural 
Network
Reference Device
Device 1
…
Device i
…
Device 1
Device i
Signal 
Collection
Signal 
Preprocessing
RFF 
Extraction
Signal 
Collection
Signal 
Preprocessing
RFF 
Extraction
Signal 
Collection
Signal 
Preprocessing
Model Signal 
Gathering
Signal 
Collection
Signal 
Preprocessing
Model Signal 
Gathering
Trained Neural 
Network
Devices 
Classification
Receiver Rx1
Receiver Rx1
Receiver Rx2
Receiver Rx2
Reference Device
(a)
Training
Testing
Training  Neural 
Network
Trained Neural 
Network
Signal 
Collection
Signal 
Preprocessing
RFF 
Extraction
Signal 
Collection
Signal 
Preprocessing
RFF 
Extraction
Trained Neural 
Network
Devices 
Classification
Receiver Rx1
Receiver Rx2
…
Device i
Device 1
…
Device i
Device 1
(b)
Fig. 3: Diagrams illustrating the proposed receiver-agnostic RFF extraction and classification method: (a) Under flat fading
channel scenarios and (b) under frequency-selective fading channel scenarios.
A. System Overview
The system diagrams of the proposed method are shown
in Fig. 3. Fig. 3(a) illustrates the RFF extraction process
for flat fading channel scenarios. During the training stage,
receiver Rx1 first receives the signal from the reference device,
referred to as the model signal. Then, Rx1 collects signals from
various devices and extracts receiver-agnostic RFF features
with the aid of the model signal. These extracted RFF features
are then used to train a neural network. In the test stage, a
new receiver, Rx2, first gathers the model signal from the
reference device. Next, Rx2 collects signals from different
devices and extracts receiver-agnostic RFF features with the
help of the model signal. These extracted RFF features are
then input into the trained neural network for classification.
The RFF extraction process for frequency-selective fading
channel scenarios is shown in Fig. 3(b). In the training stage,
Rx1 collects signals from various devices and directly extracts
the receiver-agnostic RFF features to train a neural network.
During the test stage, Rx2 receives signals from different
devices, extracts the receiver-agnostic RFF features, and uses
the trained neural network for classification.
B. RFF Extraction under Flat Fading Channel Scenarios
1) RFF and Channel Effects on the Signal: Without con-
sidering the additive noise, the transmitted signal affected by
the transmitter’s RFF can be expressed as
x′ = fT ⊗x,
(6)
where ⊗represents the convolution operation and fT is the
transmitter’s RFF effect. In flat fading channel scenarios, the
channel fading is constant across different subcarriers. After
being affected by the channel effects, the received signal can
be expressed as
y1
′ = α · x′ = α · fT ⊗x,
(7)
where α represents the flat fading channel effects. The re-
ceiver’s RFF can also influence the received signal. The signal
affected by the receiver’s RFF can be expressed as
y1 = fR ⊗y1
′ = α · fR ⊗fT ⊗x,
(8)
where fR is the receiver’s RFF effects. After being trans-
formed into the frequency domain, the final received signal
is
Y1 = α · FR · FT · X,
(9)
where FR, FT , and X are the Fourier transforms (FTs) of fR,
ft, and x, respectively.
2) RFF Extraction: To obtain the receiver-agnostic RFF
features, a reference device based method is proposed for RFF
feature extraction. It is assumed that there is one reference
device TM, I transmitters, and J receivers. Since the preamble
remains unchanged, the L-STF and L-LTF parts can be utilized
to extract RFF features. Here, we use the L-LTF part to
demonstrate the RFF extraction process of the RD method.
The signal transmitted by the reference device and received


6
Fig. 4: The CSI without RFF effects and the extracted RFF
features from different WiFi devices, captured by different
receivers in the L-LTF part under flat fading channel scenarios
in simulations: (a) The CSI without RFF effects and (b) the
extracted RFF features.
by the j-th receiver in the frequency domain can be expressed
as
Y1,TM,Rj = αM,j · FRj,L · FTM,L · XLLT F ,
(10)
where αM,j is the channel effect between the reference device
TM and the j-th receiver Rj. FTM,L and FRj,L are the
frequency domain RFF effects in the L-LTF part of TM and
Rj, respectively. XLLT F is the FT of a symbol in the L-LTF
part.
The signal transmitted by the i-th transmitter and received
by the j-th receiver in the frequency domain can be expressed
as
Y1,Ti,Rj = αi,j · FRj,L · FTi,L · XLLT F ,
(11)
where αi,j represents the channel effect between the i-th
transmitter Ti and the j-th receiver Rj, and FTi,L denotes
the frequency domain RFF effects in the L-LTF part of Ti.
By dividing the signal in (11) by the signal in (10), the
receiver-agnostic RFF of the i-th device is obtained as
RFFi1 = Y1,Ti,Rj
Y1,TM,Rj
=
αi,jFTi,L
αM,jFTM,L
= βi,j,M
FTi,L
FTM,L
.
(12)
The influence of the parameter βi,j,M can be removed through
the normalization process, as it is a constant across different
subcarriers.
To obtain additional dimensions of RFF features, the
receiver-agnostic RFF features can also be extracted from
the L-STF part using the same method. The receiver-agnostic
RFF of the i-th device extracted from the L-STF part can be
expressed as
RFFi2 = βi,j,M
FTi,S
FTM,S
,
(13)
where FTM,S and FTi,S represent the frequency domain RFF
effects in the L-STF part of the reference device TM and the i-
th device Ti, respectively. The training and classification strat-
egy using both the L-STF and L-LTF parts will be discussed in
Section V-A. Note that the extracted RFF features are from the
estimated frequency-domain channel state information (CSI),
also known as the channel frequency response (CFR). The
original CFR contains contributions from the transmitter, the
channel, and the receiver. By applying the proposed method
to the original CFR, the channel and receiver effects can
be removed, allowing the transmitter’s RFF features to be
extracted.
TABLE II: WiFi Modules
Devices
Dev1
Dev2
Dev3
Dev4
Dev5
Modules
TL-WDR
4310
TL-WDR
4310
TL-WDR
4310
RT-AC66U
RT-N66U
Devices
Dev6
Dev7
Dev8
Dev9
Dev10
Modules
RT-N66U
LG-D300
MAN1K-
3113NA
NETGEAR-
R6700
MOAP
1200D
Devices
Dev11
Dev12
Dev13
Dev14
Modules
LG-
N595
UTT-
750W
GDGEN
20
TL-C2-
AC750
TABLE III: USRP Modules
Receivers
Rx1
Rx2
Rx3
Rx4
Rx5
Modules
USRP
N210
LW
B210
LW B205
mini-i
LW B205
mini-i
USRP B205
mini-i
3) Evaluation:
Fig. 4 illustrates the extracted RFF of
devices T1 and T2, captured by different receivers after
energy normalization, with a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of
40 dB under flat fading channel scenarios in simulations.
The distances between different transmitters and receivers are
both set to 10 meters in the simulation. Different random
seeds are used for the realizations of each transmitter-receiver
link. Thus, the channels of different links can be regarded
as spatially independent. The CSI of different transmitter-
receiver links is shown in Fig. 4(a), where the CSI amplitudes
vary across links. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the extracted
RFF features of each transmitter remain consistent despite
spatial channel variations and receiver differences. Therefore,
the proposed RD method demonstrates robustness to spatial
channel variations and receiver differences.
Table II presents the types of WiFi modules, while Table
III shows the types of USRP modules employed for signal
receiving. Fig. 5 shows the normalized RFF features of Dev5
and Dev11, obtained by Rx3 and Rx5 from the L-LTF part
in a wired scenario [26], [29]. It can be observed that the
extracted RFF features of different devices vary. However, for
Fig. 5: Normalized RFF features of different devices, obtained
by different receivers in the L-LTF part under the flat fading
channel scenario during experiments: (a) Dev5, Rx3; (b)
Dev11, Rx3; (c) Dev5, Rx5; and (d) Dev11, Rx5.


7
Fig. 6: The CSI without RFF effects and the extracted RFF
features from different devices, captured by different receivers
using the HL method under frequency-selective fading channel
scenarios in simulations: (a) The CSI without RFF effects and
(b) the extracted RFF features.
each individual device, the RFF features extracted by different
receivers remain similar. Therefore, the proposed RD method
can extract receiver-agnostic RFF features under the flat fading
channel scenario.
C. RFF Extraction under Frequency-selective Fading Channel
Scenarios
1) RFF
and
Channel
Effects
on
the
Signal:
Under
frequency-selective fading channel scenarios, the transmitted
signal has the same form as in (6). The received signal, af-
fected by frequency-selective channel effects, can be expressed
as
y2
′ = h ⊗x′ = h ⊗fT ⊗x,
(14)
where h denotes the frequency-selective channel effects. The
signal y2′, affected by the receiver’s RFF, can be expressed as
y2 = fR ⊗y2
′ = h ⊗fR ⊗fT ⊗x.
(15)
The signal y2 can be transformed into the frequency domain
as
Y2 = H · FR · FT · X,
(16)
where H is the FT of h.
2) RFF Extraction: A division-based receiver-agnostic RFF
identification method is proposed to eliminate both the channel
effects and the receiver’s RFF effects. In the L-LTF part, the
signal transmitted by the i-th transmitter Ti and received by
the j-th receiver Rj in the frequency domain can be expressed
as
Y2L,Ti,Rj = H · FRj,L · FTi,L · XL.
(17)
In the HT-LTF part, the signal transmitted by Ti and received
by Rj in the frequency domain can be expressed as
Y2H,Ti,Rj = H · FRj,H · FTi,H · XH.
(18)
In this paper, we assumed that the RFFs across HT-LTF and
L-LTF parts are different of the device to be classified, while
the RFFs across HT-LTF and L-LTF parts are similar of the
receivers. Therefore, we have
FRj,H = FRj,L,
(19)
FTi,H ̸= FTi,L.
(20)
Fig. 7: Normalized RFF features of different devices, ob-
tained by different receivers using the HL method under
the frequency-selective fading channel scenario during exper-
iments: (a) Dev6, Rx3; (b) Dev13, Rx3; (c) Dev6, Rx5; and
(d) Dev13, Rx5.
The receiver-agnostic RFF of Ti can be obtained by dividing
the signal in (18) by the signal in (17) in the frequency domain
as
RFFi2 =
Y2H ,Ti,Rj
Y2L,Ti,Rj =
H·FRj ,H·FTi,H·XH
H·FRj ,L·FTi,L·XL = γHL
FTi,H
FTi,L ,
(21)
where γHL is constant across different transmissions because
XH and XL are invariant.
3) Evaluation: Fig. 6 illustrates the extracted RFFs of T1
and T2, obtained by different receivers after energy normaliza-
tion, under frequency-selective fading channel scenarios with
an SNR of 40 dB in simulations. Similar to the simulation
setup in Fig. 4, the distances between different transmitters
and receivers are both set to 10 meters. Different random
seeds are used for the realizations of different transmitter-
receiver links. The CSI of different transmitter-receiver links is
shown in Fig. 6(a), where the CSI amplitudes also differ across
links. As shown in Fig. 6(b), despite spatial channel variations
and receiver differences, the extracted RFF features of each
transmitter remain consistent. Thus, the proposed HL method
can mitigate the adverse effects of spatial channel variations
and receiver differences.
Fig. 7 shows the normalized RFF features of Dev6 and
Dev13, obtained by receivers Rx3 and Rx5 during exper-
iments. As shown in Fig. 7, the extracted RFF features
of different devices are distinguishable. Moreover, the RFF
features of each device, extracted by different receivers, remain
similar. Thus, the proposed HL method can extract receiver-
agnostic RFF features under frequency-selective fading chan-
nel scenarios.
V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
A. Experimental Setting
1) Signal Collection:
First, the cable wire is used to
connect the WiFi module directly to the universal software


8
TABLE IV: WiFi Modules in Different Evaluation Sets
Devices
WiFi Module
Evaluation Set S1
Evaluation Set S2
Dev1
TL-WDR4310
!
Dev2
TL-WDR4310
"(Reference Device)
!
Dev3
TL-WDR4310
!
Dev4
RT-AC66U
!
Dev5
RT-N66U
!
Dev6
RT-N66U
!
!
Dev7
LG-D300
!
!
Dev8
MAN1K-3113NA
!
!
Dev9
NETGEAR-R6700
!
Dev10
MOAP1200D
!
Dev11
LG-N595
!
Dev12
UTT-750W
!
!
Dev13
GDGEN20
!
!
Dev14
TL-C2-AC750
!
!
TABLE V: Training Set
Training Set
USRP
Set1
Rx2, Rx3
Set2
Rx2, Rx3, Rx4
Set3
Rx2, Rx3, Rx4, Rx5
Set4
Rx1, Rx2
Set5
Rx1, Rx2, Rx4
Set6
Rx1, Rx2, Rx4, Rx5
radio peripheral (USRP) for evaluating the performance of the
proposed method in the flat fading channel scenario [26], [29].
The sampling rate of the USRP is set to 20 Msps. A radio
frequency attenuator with 30 dB attenuation is employed to
protect the USRP. The carrier frequency of the WiFi devices
is set to 5.745 GHz, corresponding to the 149th WiFi channel.
Second, to evaluate the performance of the proposed method
under the frequency-selective fading channel scenarios, exper-
iments are conducted in a typical packed indoor office and a
corridor with dynamic passersby. Signals are collected in the
packed indoor office under static line-of-sight (LOS), static
non-line-of-sight (NLOS), and mobile scenarios, and in the
corridor under the static LOS scenario. Table IV presents the
types of WiFi modules used in the different experiments, and
Table III shows the types of USRP modules employed for
signal receiving.
As illustrate in Table IV, evaluation set S1 consist of
one reference device and ten WiFi devices for classification.
Evaluation set S2 also employs ten WiFi devices for classifica-
tion, but without a reference device. To train neural networks
with signals received from multiple transmitters, six distinct
training sets are defined, as shown in Table V.
2) Neural Network for Classification: Since neural net-
works are widely used in RFF identification, we utilize the
InceptionTime neural network [50], which has been shown
to achieve high classification accuracy [3]. Similar to the ap-
proach in [3], soft labeling is employed to prevent overfitting,
and L2 regularization is incorporated to improve the model’s
generalization performance.
3) Training of Neural Network: To train the neural network,
the label smoothing factor, number of epochs, batch size,
learning rate, and L2 regularization are set to 0.1, 50, 64,
0.001, and 0.1, respectively. The model with the lowest loss
value on the validation set is saved as the best model. The
classification accuracy is averaged using the Monte Carlo
multiple validation method. Under the flat fading channel
Fig. 8: Classification accuracy with training on a single re-
ceiver under the flat fading channel scenario: (a) Tested on
Rx1 and (b) tested on Rx3.
scenario, the RFF features extracted from the L-STF and L-
LTF parts are used to train two separate neural networks during
the training process. In the testing process, the softmax outputs
of the two individual networks are combined, and the category
with the highest value is considered the predicted result [51].
4) The Evaluation Metric: We use classification accuracy
as the evaluation metric to compare the classification perfor-
mance of different methods. Classification accuracy is defined
as the ratio of correctly classified samples to the total number
of testing samples. To assess the classification performance,
the existing division-based RFF extraction method, denoted
as the DV method [15], [16], and the GAN-based two-stage
supervised learning framework, denoted as the GAN-RXA
method [31], are utilized as benchmarks in experiments.
B. Classification under the Flat Fading Channel Scenario
In this subsection, we evaluate the classification perfor-
mance of different methods across varying receivers in the
flat fading channel scenario using evaluation set S1.
1) Single Receiver Condition: Fig. 8 shows the classifica-
tion accuracy using only one receiver for training. The test
sets are collected by Rx1 and Rx3, as shown in Fig. 8(a) and
Fig. 8(b), respectively. The GAN-RXA method, which will be
evaluated in the multiple receivers condition, is not included
here, as it requires the training set to be sourced from multiple
receivers. In Fig. 8, the L-STF and L-LTF methods represent
the RFF features extracted solely from the L-STF or L-LTF
part, respectively, used for device classification.
It can be observed from Fig. 8 that the accuracy of all evalu-
ated methods decreases when the training and testing receivers
differ. Meanwhile, the proposed RD method achieves higher
classification accuracy compared to the L-STF method, L-LTF
method, and the DV method in most cases. The classification


9
Fig. 9: Normalized RFF features of Dev5 obtained by different
receivers using the DV method [15], [16]: (a) Rx3 and (b) Rx5.
Fig. 10: The confusion matrix for the proposed RD method,
with training and test sets collected by Rx4 and Rx3, respec-
tively.
accuracies exceed 80% in most cases, indicating that the
proposed method is practical for use. In contrast, the change
in receivers significantly impacts the classification accuracy of
the DV method, especially when training on Rx5 and testing
on Rx1, where the classification accuracy drops to merely
35.25%. This is because the RFF features in the L-STF and L-
LTF parts are similar, and thus, the RFF features extracted by
dividing the L-STF part from the L-LTF part in the frequency
domain are more susceptible to noise.
The noise sensitive RFF features extracted by the DV
method are illustrated in Fig. 9, which shows the RFF features
of Dev5 received by different receivers. By comparing Fig.
9(a) and Fig. 9(b) with Fig. 5(a) and Fig. 5(c), it can be
observed that the RFF features extracted by the DV method
are less stable than those extracted by the RD method. This
is because the proposed RD method extracts RFF features
by dividing the preamble of the device to be classified from
that of the reference device. Since the RFFs of the reference
device and the device to be classified are different, the RFF
features extracted by the RD method are more stable, which
is beneficial for classification. Therefore, the stacking process
required in [15], [16] for denoising is not necessary in the
proposed RD method.
The neural network structures of LSTM and Transformer
used in [32] are adopted for the RFF identification task,
and the corresponding classification accuracies are shown in
Fig. 8. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the classification accuracy of
InceptionTime is consistently higher than that of LSTM and
Transformer when the receiver changes. One plausible reason
for this is that because CSI-based feature classification resem-
Fig. 11: Classification accuracy with training on multiple
transmitters under the flat fading channel scenario: (a) Tested
on Rx1 and (b) tested on Rx3.
Fig. 12: Classification accuracies with training on Rx3 using
different reference devices and testing on various receivers
under the flat fading channel scenario.
bles a time-series classification task, for which InceptionTime
serves as a more suitable and powerful time-series classifier.
Fig. 10 shows the confusion matrix for the proposed RD
method. The training and test sets are collected by Rx4 and
Rx3, respectively. It can be observed from Fig. 10 that most
devices achieve 100% classification accuracy. This is because
the RFF features extracted by the RD method are resilient to
the impacts of receivers.
2) Multiple Receivers Condition: The classification per-
formance is evaluated when signals collected by multiple
receivers are used for training, and the results are shown in
Fig. 11. It can be observed from Fig. 11 that the proposed
RD method consistently achieves the highest classification
accuracy among all the methods. The classification accuracy
of the RD method exceeds that of the GAN-RXA method by
3.11% to 24.66%.
3) The Influence of the Reference Device Selection: To
evaluate the impact of reference device selection, different
reference devices are employed, and the corresponding clas-
sification performance is illustrated in Fig. 12. The evaluation
set is still S1. Dev2, Dev6, and Dev13 are selected as refer-
ence devices, while the remaining eight devices are used for
classification. As shown in Fig. 12, the classification accuracy
remains above 90% when training on Rx3, testing on different
receivers, and using Dev2 as the reference device. In contrast,
when Dev6 or Dev13 are selected as the reference device, the
classification accuracy is low in some cases, such as training
on Rx5 and testing on Rx1.
Since the classification accuracy depends on the reference
device, a metric should be designed for reference device
selection. After normalization, the amplitude of CSI is decom-
posed using the Daubechies order-4 (db4) wavelet into four


10
Fig. 13: The CSI from the L-LTF part of different reference
devices before and after wavelet filtering: (a) Dev2, (b) Dev6,
and (c) Dev13.
Fig. 14: The correlation between the metric ηLF and classifi-
cation accuracy when the receiver changes.
layers and reconstructed from the approximation coefficients
in the fourth layer to obtain the low-frequency component
of the normalized CSI. The energies of the normalized CSI
before and after wavelet filtering are denoted by EB and EA,
respectively. Then, a metric for selecting the reference device
can be expressed as
ηLF = EA
EB
.
(22)
The normalized CSI of different reference devices collected
by Rx3, both before and after wavelet filtering, and the
corresponding ηLF are shown in Fig. 13. As illustrated in Fig.
13, the reference device Dev2, which achieves the highest
classification accuracy on average, also exhibits the highest
ηLF.
Fig. 14 shows the ηLF values of different reference de-
vices and the corresponding classification accuracies when
tested on different receivers. Based on these two-dimensional
samples, the p-value between ηLF and classification accuracy
is calculated as 0.0034. Since the p-value is much smaller
than 0.05, there is a strong correlation between ηLF and
classification accuracy. By applying least-squares (LS) fitting
to these samples, it can be observed that and classification
accuracy are positively correlated. Therefore, ηLF can be
utilized as a metric for reference device selection.
Fig. 15: Classification accuracy with training on the evaluation
set S2 under the flat fading channel scenario: (a) Tested on Rx1
and (b) tested on Rx3.
Fig. 16: Classification accuracy with training on a single
receiver under the static LOS scenario: (a) Tested on Rx1 and
(b) tested on Rx3.
4) Comparison between the RD and HL Methods: Since
the HL method is based on the HT-MF frame, we evaluate the
classification performance using test set S2, where the HT-
MF frame appears more frequently. As shown in Fig. 15, the
classification accuracies of the proposed RD and HL methods
are similar. However, since HT-MF signals, which are rare in
some devices, are required in the HL method, the RD method
is more universal, as both non-HT and HT-MF signals are
suitable for RFF feature extraction in the RD method.
C. Classification under Frequency-selective Fading Channel
Scenarios
In this subsection, we evaluate the classification perfor-
mance of different methods under receiver differences in
frequency-selective fading channel scenarios using evaluation
set S2. All devices in evaluation set S2, except Dev2 and Dev3,
are used in the experiments conducted under the static corridor
scenario.
1) Classification under the Same Channel Scenario: Fig.
16, Fig. 17, and Fig. 18 show the classification accuracy of the
DV method and the proposed HL method when the training set


11
Fig. 17: Classification accuracy with training on a single
receiver in the static NLOS scenario: (a) Tested on Rx1 and
(b) tested on Rx3.
Fig. 18: Classification accuracy with training on a single
receiver in the mobile scenario: (a) Tested on Rx1 and (b)
tested on Rx3.
is collected from a single receiver in the packed indoor office
under the static LOS, static NLOS, and mobile scenarios,
respectively. As shown in these figures, classification accuracy
decreases when the receiver changes. However, the classifi-
cation accuracy of the proposed HL method is consistently
higher than that of the DV method by 2.44% to 37.95%
when the training and test sets are collected from different
receivers, demonstrating a significant classification accuracy
improvement in most cases. This is because the proposed
HL method extracts higher-dimensional RFF features, i.e., 52
subcarriers, compared to the DV method, i.e., 12 subcarriers
[15], [16].
The classification accuracies of InceptionTime, LSTM, and
Transformer are compared under the static LOS scenario, as
shown in Fig. 16. As illustrated in Fig. 16, the classification
accuracies of InceptionTime and Transformer are comparable,
whereas LSTM achieves the lowest accuracy. Therefore, as
a strong time-series classifier, InceptionTime is well suited
for radio frequency fingerprint identification based on features
Fig. 19: Classification accuracy with training on a single
receiver under the static corridor scenario: (a) Tested on Rx1
and (b) tested on Rx3.
extracted from CSI amplitude.
Fig. 20: Normalized RFF features of Dev13 obtained by
different receivers using the DV method [15], [16]: (a) Rx3
and (b) Rx5.
The classification accuracy in the static corridor scenario,
when trained on a single receiver and tested on Rx1 and Rx3,
is shown in Fig. 19. As illustrated in Fig. 19, the classification
accuracy of the proposed HL method exceeds 75% even
under receiver changes. Moreover, the proposed HL method
outperforms the existing DV method by 14.25% to 54.97%
under receiver differences.
Fig. 20 shows the RFF features of Dev13 received by
different receivers using the DV method. Comparing Fig. 20(a)
and Fig. 20(b) with Fig. 7(b) and Fig. 7(d), it is evident that
the RFF features extracted by the DV method are less stable
than those extracted by the HL method.
We combine the features by dividing the L-STF part with
the L-LTF part and dividing the HT-LTF part with the L-
LTF part. Then, the classification accuracy is compared with
the HL method. As shown in Fig. 16, Fig. 17, and Fig.
18, the classification accuracies of the combined features are
similar to those of the HL method. This is because the RFF
features extracted by the HL method already possess sufficient
representational ability to achieve high classification accuracy.
Fig. 21 shows the confusion matrix of the proposed HL
method. The training and test sets were collected by Rx2
and Rx3, respectively. As shown in Fig. 21, most devices
achieve 100% classification accuracy. However, Dev2 is often
misclassified as Dev1 due to both devices having the same
module. Similarly, Dev12 and Dev14 are frequently misclas-
sified as each other. This is because the RFF features of these
Fig. 21: The confusion matrix for the proposed HL method
under the static LOS scenario, with training and test sets
collected by Rx2 and Rx3, respectively.


12
Fig. 22: RFF features of different devices extracted by Rx2
using the HL method under the static LOS scenario: (a) Dev12
and (b) Dev14.
Fig. 23: Classification accuracy with training on multiple
transmitters under the frequency-selective channel scenario:
(a) The static LOS scenario, (b) the static NLOS scenario,
and (c) the mobile scenario.
two devices in both the L-LTF and HT-LTF parts are similar,
leading the HL method to extract noise-like RFF features, as
shown in Fig. 22, which causes misclassification.
Fig. 23(a), Fig. 23(b), and Fig. 23(c) show the classification
accuracy of different methods in the packed indoor office when
multiple receivers are used under the static LOS, static NLOS,
and mobile scenarios, respectively. The test set comes from
Rx1. As illustrated in Fig. 23, the classification accuracy of
the proposed HL method is consistently higher than that of
the DV method, since the HL method can extract a higher
dimension of receiver-agnostic RFF features. As the number
of training receivers increases, the classification accuracy of
the GAN-RXA method improves and exceeds that of the HL
method when Set3 is used as the training set. However, when
the number of training receivers is small, e.g., two training
receivers, the classification accuracy of the HL method is
higher than that of the GAN-RXA method. Moreover, the
training process of the neural network in the GAN-RXA
method is time-consuming and prone to convergence issues,
making the method less practical.
2) Classification under Different Channel Scenarios: Fig.
24 shows the classification accuracies of different methods in
the packed indoor office when the training and testing scenar-
ios differ, with the training set from Set1 and the test set from
Rx1. As shown in Fig. 24, the changes in scenarios results in
Fig. 24: Classification accuracy tested under different scenar-
ios: (a) The static LOS scenario, (b) the static NLOS scenario,
and (c) the mobile scenario.
Fig. 25: Classification accuracy with training under the static
corridor scenario and testing under various scenarios: (a)
Under the same receiver and (b) under different receivers.
a decrease in the classification accuracy of the proposed HL
method. This is because a small amount of channel component
remains in the extracted RFF features, leading to the decrease
of classification accuracy under different channel scenarios.
The classification accuracy is consistently high when training
in the mobile scenario, as signals collected in such scenario ex-
perience a broader range of channel conditions, which makes
the trained neural network more robust to channel variations.
Meanwhile, the HL method achieves the highest classification
accuracy when testing on the static LOS scenario. Although
the classification accuracy of the HL method is somewhat
lower than that of the GAN-RXA method in certain cases,
such as testing on the static NLOS and mobile scenarios, the
HL method only requires one receiver for training, making it
more time-efficient in signal collection and more practical for
deployment. On the other hand, the RD method consistently
yields lower classification accuracy, as it fails to mitigate
the frequency-selective fading channel effects. In particular,
as shown in Fig. 24(c), the proposed HL method achieves
higher classification accuracy than the existing DV method
when trained in the LOS or NLOS scenarios and tested in the
mobile scenario. Therefore, the proposed HL method is more
robust to channel variations than the existing DV method.


13
Classification accuracies trained under the static corridor
scenario and tested under various scenarios are shown in
Fig. 25. As illustrated in Fig. 25, the proposed HL method
consistently achieves higher classification accuracy than the
existing DV method under scenario changes. Furthermore, by
comparing Fig. 25(a) with Fig. 25(b), it can be observed that
the classification accuracy of the proposed method slightly
decreases when different receivers are used for training and
testing. In contrast, the decrease in the classification accuracy
of the existing DV method is more pronounced under receiver
changes. Therefore, the proposed HL method is more robust
to receiver changes and spatial channel variations than the DV
method.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a division-based receiver-
agnostic RFF extraction method in WiFi systems with only one
receiver used for training while the calibration and stacking
processes were not needed. In flat fading channel scenarios,
a reference device based receiver-agnostic RFF identification
method was designed for RFF extraction and identification.
By dividing the preamble of the device to be classified and
the reference device in the frequency domain, the receiver-
dependent effects can be removed, and high-dimensional RFF
features can be extracted. By combining the RFF features
extracted from the L-STF and L-LTF parts, the proposed
RD method can achieve high classification accuracy. Mean-
while, to achieve high classification accuracy under receiver
differences, the device with a high ηLF value under the
training receiver should be chosen as the reference device.
In frequency-selective fading channel scenarios, a division-
based receiver-agnostic HL method for RFF identification is
put forward without the reference device. By dividing the HT-
LTF part by the L-LTF part in the frequency domain, high
dimensions of channel irrelevant and receiver-agnostic RFF
features can be extracted. The simulation and experimental
results demonstrated that the proposed method can extract
receiver-agnostic RFF features effectively and can achieve
high classification accuracy under receiver differences. As a
powerful time-series classifier, InceptionTime is well suited
for radio frequency fingerprint identification using features
extracted from CSI.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Babun, K. Denney, Z. B. Celik et al., “A survey on IoT platforms:
Communication, security, and privacy perspectives,” Comput. Networks,
vol. 192, p. 108040, June 2021.
[2] M. Stoyanova, Y. Nikoloudakis, S. Panagiotakis et al., “A survey on the
Internet of Things (IoT) forensics: Challenges, approaches, and open
issues,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1191–1221,
Jan. 2020.
[3] X. Yang and D. Li, “LED-RFF: LTE DMRS based channel robust radio
frequency fingerprint identification scheme,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur., vol. 19, pp. 1855–1869, Dec. 2023.
[4] S. Abbas, M. Abu Talib, Q. Nasir et al., “Radio frequency fingerprinting
techniques for device identification: a survey,” Int. J. Inf. Secur., vol. 23,
no. 2, pp. 1389–1427, 2024.
[5] W. Hou, X. Wang, J.-Y. Chouinard et al., “Physical layer authentication
for mobile systems with time-varying carrier frequency offsets,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1658–1667, Apr. 2014.
[6] T. D. Vo-Huu, T. D. Vo-Huu, and G. Noubir, “Fingerprinting Wi-Fi
devices using software defined radios,” in Proc. ACM WiSec 2016,
Darmstadt, Germany, July 2016.
[7] J. Hua, H. Sun, Z. Shen et al., “Accurate and efficient wireless device
fingerprinting using channel state information,” in Proc. IEEE INFO-
COM 2018, Honolulu, HI, USA, Apr. 2018.
[8] P. Liu, P. Yang, W.-Z. Song et al., “Real-time identification of rogue
WiFi connections using environment-independent physical features,” in
Proc. IEEE INFOCOM 2019, Paris, France, Apr. 2019.
[9] L. N. Kandel, Z. Zhang, and S. Yu, “Exploiting CSI-MIMO for accurate
and efficient device identification,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM 2019,
Waikoloa, HI, USA, Dec. 2019.
[10] T. Jian, B. C. Rendon, E. Ojuba et al., “Deep learning for RF finger-
printing: A massive experimental study,” IEEE Internet Things Mag.,
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 50–57, Mar. 2020.
[11] T. Jian, Y. Gong, Z. Zhan et al., “Radio frequency fingerprinting on the
edge,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 4078–4093, Mar.
2021.
[12] T. Chen, H. Shen, A. Hu et al., “Radio frequency fingerprints extraction
for LTE-V2X: A channel estimation based methodology,” in Proc. IEEE
VTC2022-Fall, London, UK, Sept. 2022.
[13] Y. Chen, J. Yu, H. Chen et al., “A channel robust radio frequency finger-
print authentication method based on hadamard product comparison,” in
Proc. IEEE WCSP 2023, Hangzhou, China, Nov. 2023.
[14] R. Kong and H. Chen, “CSI-RFF: Leveraging micro-signals on CSI
for RF fingerprinting of commodity WiFi,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur., vol. 19, pp. 5301–5315, May 2024.
[15] T. Chen, A. Hu, and Y. Jiang, “Radio frequency fingerprint-based DSRC
intelligent vehicle networking identification mechanism in high mobility
environment,” Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 9, p. 5037, Apr. 2022.
[16] Y. Xing, A. Hu, J. Zhang et al., “Design of a channel robust radio
frequency fingerprint identification scheme,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 6946–6959, Dec. 2022.
[17] L. Yang, S. Camtepe, Y. Gao et al., “On the use of power amplifier
nonlinearity quotient to improve radio frequency fingerprint identifica-
tion in time-varying channels,” in Proc. IEEE PIMRC 2023, Toronto,
ON, Canada, Sept. 2023.
[18] Z. Zhang, A. Hu, X. Qi et al., “A channel resilient RFF extraction
scheme for cyclic prefix contained systems,” Phys. Commun., p. 102444,
Oct. 2024.
[19] J. He, S. Huang, S. Chang et al., “Radio frequency fingerprint iden-
tification with hybrid time-varying distortions,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 6724–6736, Feb. 2023.
[20] J. He, S. Huang, Z. Yang et al., “Channel-agnostic radio frequency
fingerprint identification using spectral quotient constellation errors,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 158–170, May 2023.
[21] J. He, S. Huang, Y. Chen et al., “Radio frequency fingerprint identifica-
tion for OFDM system considering unknown multipath fading channel,”
IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Networking, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 2076–
2087, May 2024.
[22] N. Soltani, K. Sankhe, J. Dy et al., “More is better: Data augmentation
for channel-resilient RF fingerprinting,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 58,
no. 10, pp. 66–72, Oct. 2020.
[23] A. Al-Shawabka, P. Pietraski, S. B. Pattar et al., “DeepLoRa: Fin-
gerprinting LoRa devices at scale through deep learning and data
augmentation,” in Proc. ACM MobiHoc 2021, Shanghai, China, July
2021.
[24] C. Comert, M. Kulhandjian, O. M. Gul et al., “Analysis of augmentation
methods for RF fingerprinting under impaired channels,” in Proc. ACM
WiseML Workshop 2022, San Antonio, TX, USA, May 2022.
[25] L. Chen, C. Zhao, Y. Zheng et al., “Radio frequency fingerprint
identification based on transfer learning,” in Proc. IEEE ICCC 2021,
Xiamen, China, July 2021.
[26] J. Gaskin, B. Hamdaoui, and W.-K. Wong, “Tweak: Towards portable
deep learning models for domain-agnostic LoRa device authentication,”
in Proc. IEEE CNS 2022, Austin, TX, USA, Oct. 2022.
[27] Y. Zheng, W. Ying, S. Hong et al., “A method for cross-receiver
specific emitter identification based on CBAM-CNN-BDA,” in Proc.
IEEE ICCASIT 2022, Dali, China, Oct. 2022.
[28] K. Huang, B. Jiang, J. Yang et al., “Cross-receiver specific emitter
identification based on a deep adversarial neural network with separated
batch normalization,” in Proc. SPIE ICCSCT 2022, Beijing, China, July
2022.
[29] J. Gaskin, A. Elmaghbub, B. Hamdaoui et al., “Deep learning model
portability for domain-agnostic device fingerprinting,” IEEE Access,
vol. 11, pp. 86 801–86 823, Aug. 2023.


14
[30] X. Zha, T. Li, Z. Qiu et al., “Cross-receiver radio frequency fingerprint
identification based on contrastive learning and subdomain adaptation,”
IEEE Signal Process Lett., vol. 30, pp. 70–74, Feb. 2023.
[31] T. Zhao, S. Sarkar, E. Krijestorac et al., “GAN-RXA: A practical
scalable solution to receiver-agnostic transmitter fingerprinting,” IEEE
Trans. Cognit. Commun. Networking, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 403–416, Nov.
2023.
[32] G. Shen, J. Zhang, A. Marshall et al., “Towards receiver-agnostic and
collaborative radio frequency fingerprint identification,” IEEE Trans.
Mob. Comput., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 7618–7634, Dec. 2023.
[33] J. Bao, X. Xie, Z. Lu et al., “Receiver-agnostic radio frequency finger-
printing based on two-stage unsupervised domain adaptation and fine-
tuning,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM 2023, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
Dec. 2023.
[34] Z. Chen, Z. Pang, W. Hou et al., “Cross-device radio frequency
fingerprinting identification based on domain adaptation,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2391–2400, Jan. 2024.
[35] J. Yu, C. Zhao, X. Huang et al., “RF fingerprint recognition for different
receiving devices using transfer learning,” in Proc. IEEE CSCWD 2024,
Tianjin, China, May 2024.
[36] Y. Xing, A. Hu, J. Zhang et al., “On radio frequency fingerprint
identification for DSSS systems in low SNR scenarios,” IEEE Commun.
Lett., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 2326–2329, Sept. 2018.
[37] G. Shen, J. Zhang, A. Marshall et al., “Toward length-versatile and
noise-robust radio frequency fingerprint identification,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 2355–2367, Apr. 2023.
[38] L. Xie, L. Peng, and J. Zhang, “Towards robust RF fingerprint identi-
fication using spectral regrowth and carrier frequency offset,” in Proc.
IEEE INFOCOM 2025, London, UK, May 2025.
[39] R. Xie, W. Xu, Y. Chen et al., “A generalizable model-and-data driven
approach for open-set RFF authentication,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur., vol. 16, pp. 4435–4450, Aug. 2021.
[40] T. Li, Z. Wen, C. Jin et al., “Meta-RFF: Meta-task adaptive based few-
shot open-set incremental learning for RF fingerprint recognition,” IEEE
Trans. Cognit. Commun. Networking (Early Access), July 2025.
[41] X. Gu, W. Wu, N. Guo et al., “TeRFF: Temperature-aware radio
frequency fingerprinting for smartphones,” in Proc. IEEE SECON 2022,
Stockholm, Sweden, Sept. 2022.
[42] F. Restuccia, S. D’Oro, A. Al-Shawabka et al., “DeepRadioID: Real-
time channel-resilient optimization of deep learning-based radio finger-
printing algorithms,” in Proc. ACM MobiHoc 2019, Catania, Italy, July
2019.
[43] F. Restuccia, S. D’ Oro, A. Al-Shawabka et al., “DeepFIR: Channel-
robust physical-layer deep learning through adaptive waveform filtering,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 8054–8066, July
2021.
[44] A. Elmaghbub and B. Hamdaoui, “LoRa device fingerprinting in the
wild: Disclosing RF data-driven fingerprint sensitivity to deployment
variability,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 142 893–142 909, Oct. 2021.
[45] S. Hanna, S. Karunaratne, and D. Cabric, “WiSig: A large-scale WiFi
signal dataset for receiver and channel agnostic RF fingerprinting,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 22 808–22 818, Feb. 2022.
[46] H. Liu, S. Zhu, L. Yang et al., “Receiver-agnostic radio frequency
fingerprint identification via feature disentanglement,” in Proc. IEEE
SPAWC Workshop 2023, Shanghai, China, Sept. 2023.
[47] K. Merchant and B. Nousain, “Toward receiver-agnostic RF fingerprint
verification,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops 2019, Waikoloa, HI,
USA, Dec. 2019.
[48] L. Yang, Q. Li, X. Ren et al., “Mitigating receiver impact on radio fre-
quency fingerprint identification via domain adaptation,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 11, no. 13, pp. 24 024–24 034, Apr. 2024.
[49] R. Abdollahi, H. R. Amindavar, R. K. Shokooh et al., “A novel
sparse-based approach for joint radio frequency fingerprint and channel
estimation,” Phys. Commun., vol. 66, p. 102399, Oct. 2024.
[50] H. Ismail Fawaz, B. Lucas, G. Forestier et al., “InceptionTime: Finding
AlexNet for time series classification,” Data Min. Knowl. Discovery,
vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1936–1962, Sept. 2020.
[51] Y. Qiu, L. Peng, J. Zhang et al., “Signal-independent RFF identification
for LTE mobile devices via ensemble deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE
GLOBECOM 2022, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Dec. 2022.
