Spatially Consistent Air-to-Ground Channel
Modeling and Simulation via 3D Shadow
Projections
Evgenii Vinogradov1,3, Aymen Fakhreddine2, Abdul Saboor3, Sergi Abadal1, Sofie Pollin3
1NaNoNetworking Center in Catalonia (N3Cat), Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain;
2Institute of Networked and Embedded Systems, University of Klagenfurt, Austria
3Department of Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven, Belgium;
Email: evgenii.vinogradov@upc.edu
Abstract—We
present
an
approach
for
spatially-
consistent semi-deterministic Air-to-Ground (A2G) chan-
nel modeling in Unmanned Aerial Vehicle-assisted net-
works. We use eﬀicient 3D building shadow projections to
determine Line-of-Sight (LOS) regions, enabling fast gen-
eration of LOS maps. By integrating LOS-aware determin-
istic path loss with stochastic shadow fading, the approach
produces spatially consistent A2G radio maps suitable
for environment- and mobility-aware channel evaluation
and performance prediction. Simulation results in ITU-
compliant Manhattan grid environments demonstrate the
model’s ability to reflect key urban propagation character-
istics, such as LOS blockage patterns and outage behavior.
The proposed approach provides an eﬀicient alternative
to ray tracing or fully stochastic models, with particular
relevance for user mobility, link planning, and radio map
generation in 6G non-terrestrial networks.
Index Terms—3D model, Air-to-ground channel, Line of
Sight (LOS), unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), UAVs as
NodeB (UxNB), Uncrewed Aerial System (UAS)
I. Introduction
Non-terrestrial networks, particularly those incor-
porating Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) as Aerial
Base Stations (ABS), are viewed as key enablers to
achieve the ambitious coverage and flexibility goals of
6G [1]. The main advantage of UAV-based systems
is their high probability of establishing Line-of-Sight
(LOS) communication links with ground users [2].
LOS links typically have lower path loss and a more
stable signal compared to non-LOS (NLOS) links.
Consequently, accurate modeling of LOS conditions
is crucial for UAV-enabled communication systems,
and numerous studies have addressed LOS probability
modeling in various urban scenarios [2]–[5].
In practical deployments, user mobility leads to
transitions between LOS and NLOS conditions during
a single communication session. Popular LOS prob-
ability models are not designed to reproduce these
transitions and are unsuitable for dynamic scenar-
ios [6]. In mobile scenarios, spatial consistency becomes
critical. In terrestrial systems, the significance of spa-
tial consistency has been well-documented [7], partic-
ularly for simulating cellular handovers. Ray-Tracing
(RT) offers a solution, as it inherently preserves
spatial consistency. However, RT’s computation time
increases rapidly with growing scene complexity and
trajectory length. To overcome this, semi-deterministic
approaches [8]–[10] use RT solely for LOS deter-
mination, followed by statistical generation of other
channel components. Alternatively, LOS regions can
be defined using 3D building shadow projections [11],
[12], enabling LOS estimation without point-by-point
RT.
State-of-the-art limitations: RT-based methods are
accurate but computationally demanding (even the
semi-deterministic ones) for long trajectories or high-
resolution simulations. Meanwhile, shadow projection
methods have so far been limited to LOS probability
estimation and have not been applied to spatially
consistent channel generation.
Beyond state-of-the-art: We propose a fast 3D build-
ing shadow projection approach (originally developed
for real-time visual rendering) to deterministically
construct spatially consistent LOS maps without RT.
These maps are combined with LOS-aware channel
models to produce A2G radio maps to predict how
the channel evolve along user trajectories. This enables
eﬀicient simulation of user mobility effects, making
our method suitable for UAV-based networks and
environment-aware wireless optimization tasks such as
ground user trajectory planning and coverage analysis.
We implement this approach in the ITU-inspired Spa-
tially Consistent A2G Channel simulator (ISCA2G),
designed for urban grid environments.
The main contributions of this paper are:
• Geometry-Based Shadow Projection (GBSP) ap-
proach for LOS map determination that uses
shadows cast by 3D buildings.
• Spatially consistent A2G channel model that com-
bines LOS-dependent deterministic path loss and
stochastic shadow fading that evolves over space.
• Scalable simulator (ISCA2G) that integrates the
©2025 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future
media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or
redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
arXiv:2511.15412v1  [eess.SP]  19 Nov 2025


above components and demonstrates their appli-
cation in ITU-compliant urban grid environments
to analyze channel behavior along a ground user
trajectory.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents
the proposed GBSP approach for LOS map construc-
tion and the A2G channel model. Section III describes
the implementation of the ISCA2G simulator. Sec-
tion IV outlines the simulation setup and evaluates the
spatial characteristics of the generated LOS segments
and corresponding channels. Section VI concludes the
paper after a discussion of future research directions
in Section V.
II. Spatially consistent A2G channel
To model spatially consistent A2G links, we consider
a simplified yet representative urban environment
consisting of a single ABS and a set of outdoor ground
users. The ABS is located at a horizontal position
xABS = (xABS,yABS) and hovers at a height hABS.
The environment includes a target area A ⊂R2, which
contains multiple buildings with arbitrary shapes that
may obstruct the LOS link between the ABS and its
users. The system is designed to capture how LOS
conditions vary along the users’ routes due to these
urban obstructions as shown in Fig. 1.
In this model, we assume that outdoor ground users
are uniformly distributed over the ground area exclud-
ing building footprints, denoted by ˆA ⊂A. This allows
for a macroscopic analysis of LOS probability, where
the LOS probability is determined by the portion of
ˆA not obstructed by building shadows. For a more
detailed, user-specific analysis, we also consider the
case of a single User Equipment (UE) moving along a
predefined route R1. The route allows for determining
the LOS conditions at each specific location, depending
on the geometry of the environment. In this paper,
we focus on the spatial aspect. The obtained results
can be applied to scenarios with any user velocity
or movement patterns, as the spatial model itself is
independent of the specific dynamics of the user.
A. Channel Model
Assume communication between the ABS and a
ground-based UE moving along a route. At any given
location along the route, the channel losses (in dB)
caused by large-scale effects can be calculated as:
Λ(ri) = Λ0 +Λex(ri)+ξ(ri),
(1)
where Λ0 is the free-space path loss (FSPL) at the
reference distance d0 and frequency f, and Λex(ri) is
the excess path loss, which depends on the presence or
1Our approach is agnostic to the way used to describe the
route. Potentially, it can be defined as a function or a set of
discrete waypoints ri = (xUE,yUE) ∈ˆA connected by lines.
Fig. 1: An example scenario of a system model de-
picting an n−th building described by vn = 5 vertices
and the resulting shadow region Sn. The dotted line
indicates the user route R containing LOS and NLOS
segments shown in blue and red, respectively.
absence of LOS and the geometry of the link between
the ABS and the user location ri. Additionally, ξ(ri)
represents the zero-mean shadow fading, which has a
LOS-dependent standard deviation σξ. The shadow
fading is spatially correlated with an autocorrelation
function:
R(∆d) = e
−
∆d
ddecorr ,
(2)
where ∆d is the distance between two points and ddecorr
is the decorrelation distance.
B. Deterministic Geometry-Based Shadow Projection
Approach for LOS modeling
Within the target area, we consider N buildings,
each modeled as a vertical prism with a polygonal
base and a flat top. The base of the n-th building
lies in the xy-plane and is represented as a simple
polygon with vn vertices. Let Xb
n ∈Rvn×2 denote the
coordinates of these base vertices and let hb
n denote
the height of the building. We represent the building
as the triple bn = (vn,Xb
n,hb
n), and define the set of all
buildings as B = {bn}N
n=1. The sides of each building
form vn wall faces, each defined as a vertical rectangle
connecting two consecutive base vertices along with
their corresponding roof vertices at height hb
n.
For each building n, we calculate the shadow of each
roof vertex vn by projecting it onto the ground plane:
sn,vn = hABS · (xb
vn −xABS)
hABS −hbn
+xABS.
(3)
The shadow Sn cast by building n is obtained as the
union of (i) the building footprint, and (ii) shadows


cast by all its wall faces. The total shadowed region in
the target area is the union of all individual building
shadows:
Stotal =
∪
n
Sn.
(4)
a) LOS map definition and LOS probability: The
LOS map is defined as the subtraction of Stotal from
the outdoor area ˆA as
L = ˆA−Stotal.
(5)
When ground users are uniformly distributed over ˆA,
the NLOS probability can be calculated as the ratio
of the shadowed subarea to ˆA, i.e.,
PNLOS = Area(Stotal ∩ˆA)
Area( ˆA)
,
PLOS = 1−PNLOS.
b) Route segmentation: Finally, LOS and NLOS
segments of the route R are defined as:
RLOS = R∩L,
RNLOS = R∩Stotal.
(6)
III. ISCA2G: ITU-Inspired Spatially Consistent A2G
Channel Simulator
The proposed simulator ISCA2G2 applies the en-
vironment representation described in Section II-B to
eﬀiciently evaluate spatially consistent LOS and NLOS
conditions for A2G links, considering a static ABS
and a ground user following a piecewise linear route.
The simulator generates urban layouts based on a
Manhattan grid model [13] and determines LOS map
by computing building shadows. Next, the LOS maps
are used by the A2G channel model.
A. LOS Simulation Workflow
ISCA2G follows a workflow to classify LOS/NLOS
segments along a given route of the ground user:
a) Urban environment generation:
Representa-
tive city layouts are generated using the environmental
parameters α, β, and γ, defined respectively as the
build-up area ratio, building density per unit area,
and the scale of the building height distribution, as
specified by ITU [13]. Each realization consists of a grid
where N squared buildings of a width W are separated
by streets of width St (see Fig. 2). The widths are
computed as:
W = 1000
√α
β ,
St = 1000
√
β
−W.
(7)
The building heights are randomly sampled from a
Rayleigh distribution with scale parameter γ. The
layout is composed of N = I ·J buildings where I and
J are the numbers of buildings along x and y axes,
respectively.
2code is available on request via email to E. Vinogradov
Fig. 2: Example simulation (top view): ABS is de-
ployed at 120 meters height in the Manhattan urban
environment. The route is partly affected by shadows
cast by square buildings placed as in [13].
Each building bi, j in B is represented by an ordered
triple as bi, j = (4,Xb
i, j,hb
i, j) with the four vertices
described by the building height and the rows of the
matrix
Xb
4 =


(i−1)·(St +W)+St
( j −1)·(St +W)
(i−1)·(St +W)+St
(j −1)·(St +W)+W
i·(St +W)
( j −1)·(St +W)
i·(St +W)
(j −1)·(St +W)+W


(8)
b) Route: Similarly to previous simulators and
models [3], [14], [15], ISCA2G exploits the symmetry
and homogeneity of the Manhattan layout: i) we focus
on azimuth angles within the first quadrant [0, π
2 ] and,
ii) a complex route can be split into a number of
lines connecting L waypoints. In the simplest case, we
consider a linear route described by two waypoints
located in the middle of the street.
c) LOS map computation: For each building bi,j
in the grid, its shadow is computed by projecting all
four roof vertices onto the ground using the geometric
transformation in Eq. (3). The resulting set of pro-
jected points, combined with the base of the building,
forms a shadow region defined as their convex hull. The
total shadowed region Stotal is obtained as the union
of individual building shadows as in (4) and used (5)
to define the LOS map L.
d) Route LOS/NLOS segmentation with LOS
maps: The route of the mobile ground user R is tested
for intersection with L and Stotal using Eq. (6) to define
LOS and NLOS route segments, respectively.
B. ISCA2G Validation and Complexity Analysis
We use RT simulations as a benchmark. The RT-
based LOS/NLOS simulator (e.g., such as in our


previous papers [5], [6], [14]) discretizes the user route
into M points. For each point ri, it casts a straight ray
from the ABS to ri and checks for intersections with
all N′ buildings lying on the horizontal projection of
the ray. If any intersection occurs below the building
height, the point is marked NLOS; otherwise it is LOS.
For simplicity of the following analysis, let us assume
that all N buildings can potentially cause NLOS for
some part of the route. This yields a per-point LOS
label via M ×N intersection tests.
a) LOS verification: Both simulators produced
identical LOS results for randomly generated locations
of ABS and ground UEs, indicating the validity of the
approach presented in Section II-B and ISCA2G in
Section III. Additionally, both simulators reproduced
the azimuth and elevation-dependent LOS probability
estimation. Since the results are the same, we omit
them for the sake of brevity. Note that the azimuth-
and elevation-dependent behavior of LOS probability
reproduced by ISCA2G and [14] can be modeled
theoretically as demonstrated in [3], [15]. Since the
LOS probability model [3] shows good agreement
with the 3GPP NTN model [4], we claim that the
LOS probability results produced by ISCA2G are
verified against the state-of-the-art models. While the
theoretical models above are very useful and fast
to compute, unfortunately, they do not account for
spatial consistency.
b) Complexity comparison: In the worst case,
the RT-based method performs O(M ·N) building-ray
intersection checks. Since each building has v vertical
walls, each intersection check is O(v), resulting in a
total computational cost of O(M N v). Therefore, the
runtime grows linearly with the sampling resolution
M, the number of buildings N, and the fixed building
shape complexity v = 4.
By contrast, ISCA2G proceeds in three main steps:
1) Shadow generation: for each building, project its
v = 4 rooftop vertices to the ground, combine
them with the v = 4 base vertices, and compute
their convex hull in O(1) time (since the total
number of points is fixed at 8), for a total of
O(N).
2) Union of shadows: merge the resulting N simple
polygons using a plane-sweep or divide-and-
conquer algorithm in O(N logN + K), where K
is the total number of edges in the final union
polygon.
3) Route intersection: intersect the fixed polyline
route (with L −1 linear segments defined by L
waypoints) against the unified shadow polygon
in O(L−1+K).
In our simulator, v and L are constants with a low
value, hence, the dominant term is O(N logN). The
TABLE I: Channel model parameters
Frequency
2.5 GHz
Λ0
Eq. (9)
ρ
LOS: 0.0272
NLOS: 2.3197
µ
LOS: 0.7475
NLOS: 0.2361
ddecorr
11 m
impact of K can also be high, depending on the
environment.
Thus, while RT-based LOS simulators such as [14]
scale as O(MN) and become expensive for high resolu-
tion M, the shadow-based approach and ISCA2G have
O(N logN +K) complexity, offering computational sav-
ings for large-scale or high-resolution route analyses.
Thus, this geometry-based method along with ISCA2G
enables scalable, computationally eﬀicient, and spa-
tially consistent LOS and A2G channel modeling while
circumventing the complexity of 3D RT techniques.
C. LOS-aware A2G Channel Model
We adopt the channel model presented in Eq. (1),
incorporating path loss and shadow fading formula-
tions as in [16]. The spatial scales and types of urban
environments considered in [16] closely match the char-
acteristics of our simulation setup. The total path loss
comprises two components: (i) the reference free-space
attenuation depending on the ABS altitude and (ii)
an elevation-angle-dependent excess loss. These terms
together capture the 3D geometric nature of the A2G
link. Similarly, shadow fading is parameterized using
elevation-dependent standard deviations that differ
for LOS and NLOS cases. To ensure the exponential
shadow fading autocorrelation defined in Eq. (2), we
apply the well-known approach for spatially-consistent
shadow fading map generation proposed by Claussen
in [17].
The reference distance is defined as the relative
height of the ABS directly above the UE (i.e., d0 = hABS
in our case). Hence
Λ0 = 20log10
4πhABS f
c
.
(9)
As proposed in [16], the excess path loss depends
solely on the elevation angle. In the LOS scenario,
it is modeled as:
Λex,LOS(θ) = −20log10 sinθ,
(10)
while for NLOS conditions, the excess path loss is
Λex,NLOS(θ) = −16.16+12.0436exp(−90−θ
7.52 ). (11)
Finally, the elevation-dependent shadow fading stan-
dard deviation for LOS and NLOS respectively is
modeled as
σξ(θ) = ρ(90−θ)µ,
(12)


TABLE II: Simulation parameters
Suburban
Urban
Dense
High-Rise
Urban
Urban
α
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.5
β
750
500
300
300
γ
8
15
20
50
St
25
20.2
16.9
16.9
W
11.5
24.5
40.8
40.8
No. realizations
1000
ABS coordinates
x and y ∼U (0,1000) m, hABS ∼U (30,250) m
Route length
1000 m
UE sensitivity
-84.7 dBm
ABS EIRP
23 dBm
where the parameters ρ and µ are adopted from [16]
and can be found in Table I for the LOS and NLOS
cases. The decorrelation distance is found to be varying
between 9.5 and 12.9 m [18], we use 11 m.
IV. Results
We evaluate the proposed framework across four
representative environments defined by ITU [13]: Sub-
urban, Urban, Dense Urban, and High-Rise Urban.
The corresponding environmental parameters, as well
as other relevant simulation details, are summarized
in Table II. These settings reflect progressively denser
layouts with taller buildings.
Each simulation consists of 1000 independent real-
izations, where the UE follows a straight 1000-meter
route. The ABS is randomly placed in each run, with
horizontal coordinates drawn from x,y ∼U (0,1000) m
and altitude hABS ∼U (30,250) m.
The UE receiver sensitivity is –84.7 dBm as per
the 3GPP recommendation [19]. Strict Size-Weight-
and-Power (SWAP) constraints for ABSs result in
moderate transmit power levels and simple antennas
with low gain. In our simulations, we assume an
equivalent isotropically radiated power (EIRP) of 13,
18, and 23 dBm. Path loss and shadow fading are
modeled as described in Section III. Outage is defined
as the situation where the channels have a higher loss
than Λoutage allowed by the receiver sensitivity and the
transmitter EIRP: Λoutage =EIRP – UE sensitivity.
In the following, we focus on the spatial aspect of
A2G communication, as the previous models [3], [4],
[11]–[15] suﬀiciently covered the LOS probability and
statistical channel capacity analyses.
A. Spatially Consistent LOS Prediction
Fig. 3 shows the distribution of the lengths of the
NLOS and LOS segments in the four environments.
The simulations demonstrate the effect of the regular
Manhattan grid layout, where fixed building and
street widths define the obstruction segments. For
example, the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF)
of NLOS distances exhibits a stepped shape, with
Fig. 3: CDF of simulated NLOS (top) and LOS
(bottom) distances in different environments. More
sparse environments cause shorter NLOS and longer
LOS segments. The shape of distributions is influenced
by the regular layout and exhibits a relation to W and
St.
sharp increases occurring at regular intervals that are
multiples of W + St (i.e., a block of the Manhattan
grid). Note that the NLOS segment length does not
exceed one Suburban block in 90% cases but this value
decreases to 57-60% in Dense and High-Rise Urban
environments. On the other hand, over 80% the LOS
distances do not exceed the street width St.
B. Channel and Outage
1) Outage probability: Fig. 4 shows the distribu-
tions of channel attenuation obtained with ISCA2G
for different environments. We observe that for EIRP
= 23 dBm, outage probability does not exceed 11%
(in High-Rise Urban layout) and goes down to 4.3%
in Suburban environment. Since the route length is
1000 m, it is equivalent to 110 and 43 meters of outage.
However, for ABS EIRP = 13 dBm, we observe 53.2%
and 38.4% outage probability in the same setups (i.e.,
532 and 384 m, respectively).
2) Outage distances: We define outage distance as
segments of the UE route where the received signal
power drops below the receiver sensitivity. The outage
distance statistics for Suburban and High-Rise Urban
environments are shown in Fig. 5. The outage distances


Channel, dB
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
CDF
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
ΛOutage, EIRP = 18 dBm
ΛOutage, EIRP = 13 dBm
ΛOutage EIRP = 23 dBm
Suburban
Urban
Dense Urban
High-Rise Urban
data1
Fig. 4: CDF of channel composed on path loss and
shadow fading. Outage probability can be estimated
based on the intersection of the CDFs with Λoutage
allowed by the receiver sensitivity and the transmitter
EIRP.
Outage distance, meters
0
10
20
30
40
50
CDF
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Suburban, EIRP= 23 dBm
Suburban, EIRP= 18 dBm
Suburban, EIRP= 13 dBm
High-Rise Urban, EIRP= 13 dBm
High-Rise Urban, EIRP= 18 dBm
High-Rise Urban, EIRP= 23 dBm
Fig. 5: CDF of outage distances in Suburban and High-
Rise Urban environments. The difference between the
outage distances Urban, Dense Urban, and High-Rise
Urban environments is negligible and we omit those
curves.
grow once EIRP is decreased, however, the distances
do not exceed 9.6, 15.8, and 28 meters for EIRP = 23,
18, and 13 dBm with 95% probability. Interestingly,
the difference between the environments in terms of
outage distances is not as significant as the difference
in terms of the outage probability. Another observation
is that the segments with the outage are relatively
short (e.g., 28 m) compared to the total outage
distance (respectively, 532 m) indicating that a mobile
user could experience unstable communication with
short but frequent outages, especially with low-power
ABSs deployed in High-Rise Urban environments.
V. Future Work
Future work will extend the proposed framework
toward full-stack spatially consistent Channel Knowl-
edge Maps (CKMs) by (i) incorporating space and
frequency consistent small-scale fading atop LOS maps
and large scale channel components, (ii) generalizing
to real-world layouts using GIS data (e.g., Open-
StreetMap), (iii) parameterizing and validating A2G
channel models via measurement campaigns [20], (iv)
leveraging ML-based approaches for fast and consistent
A2G CKM generation, (v) enabling UAV mobility, and
(vi) integrating CKMs into system-level tasks such as
beam planning, outage prediction, and mobility-aware
access optimization.
VI. Conclusions
This paper presented a scalable approach for spa-
tially consistent semi-deterministic air-to-ground chan-
nel modeling with deterministic LOS maps and path
loss combined with stochastic shadow fading modeling.
The approach projects 3D buildings into 2D shadows,
enabling fast identification of LOS conditions and
environment-aware transitions in channel character-
istics, which are essential for mobile communication
performance modeling. Note that the presented model
formulation is applicable to arbitrary layouts, building
shapes, and user trajectories.
Simulation results using regular ITU-defined Man-
hattan layouts confirm the model’s ability to reflect
the effects of the urban environment. In particular,
the NLOS distance CDFs show stepped increases tied
to multiples of block sizes (consisting of a building and
streets), while over 80% of LOS segments are shorter
than the street width. Channel simulations show that
outage probability remains below 11% for high ABS
power (EIRP = 23 dBm) but increases sharply to
over 50% for low-power ABSs (EIRP = 13 dBm).
Meanwhile, outage distance remains modest (under
28 m with 95% probability), even in dense urban
settings and low EIRP of 13 dBm.
Acknowledgments
This work is part of the I+D+i project titled
BLOSSOMS, grant PID2024-158530OB-I00, funded
by
MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/
and
by
ERDF/EU.
Aymen
Fakhreddine’s
contribution
is
funded by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF – Der
Wissenschaftsfonds) under grant ESPRIT-54 (Grant
DOI: 10.55776/ESP54).
References
[1] I. F. Akyildiz, A. Kak, and S. Nie, “6G and Beyond:
The Future of Wireless Communications Systems,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 133 995–134 030, 2020.
[2] E. Vinogradov, H. Sallouha, S. De Bast, M. Azari, and
S. Pollin, “Tutorial on UAVs: A blue sky view on wireless
communication,” Journal of Mobile Multimedia, vol. 14,
no. 4, pp. 395–395, 2018.
[3] A. Saboor, E. Vinogradov, Z. Cui, A. Al-Hourani, and
S. Pollin, “A Geometry-Based Modelling Approach for the
Line-of-Sight Probability in UAV Communications,” IEEE
Open Journal of the Communications Society, vol. 5, pp.
364–378, 2024.


[4] “Study on New Radio (NR) to Support non terrestrial
networks,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project, Technical
specification group radio access network, 3GPP, document
TR 38.811, 2018.
[5] A. Saboor, Z. Cui, E. Vinogradov, and S. Pollin, “Empirical
Line-of-Sight Probability Modeling for UAVs in Random
Urban Layouts,” in 2025 IEEE Wireless Communications
and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2025, pp. 1–6.
[6] E. Vinogradov, A. Saboor, Z. Cui, and A. Fakhreddine,
“Spatially consistent air-to-ground channel modeling with
probabilistic LOS/NLOS segmentation,” in 2025 IEEE
101st Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2025-Spring),
2025, pp. 1–5.
[7] A. Karttunen, A. F. Molisch, S. Hur, J. Park, and C. J.
Zhang, “Spatially Consistent Street-by-Street Path Loss
Model for 28-GHz Channels in Micro Cell Urban Environ-
ments,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 7538–7550, 2017.
[8] A. Colpaert, E. Vinogradov, and S. Pollin, “3D beamform-
ing and handover analysis for UAV networks,” in 2020 IEEE
Globecom Workshops, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[9] Y. Li, N. Li, and C. Han, “Ray-tracing Simulation and
Hybrid Channel Modeling for Low-Terahertz UAV Commu-
nications,” in ICC 2021 - IEEE International Conference on
Communications, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[10] A. Saboor, Z. Cui, A. Colpaert, E. Vinogradov, and
S. Pollin, “CASH: Context-Aware Smart Handover for
Reliable UAV Connectivity on Aerial Corridors,” in To
appear in IEEE Global Communications Conference, 2025.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.03862
[11] D.-Y. Kim, W. Saad, and J.-W. Lee, “On the use of high-rise
topographic features for optimal aerial base station place-
ment,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1868–1884, 2023.
[12] Y. Cho, J. Won, D.-Y. Kim, and J.-W. Lee, “Optimal place-
ment of aerial base station utilizing topographic features,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 19 882–
19 900, 2025.
[13] P. Series, “Propagation data and prediction methods re-
quired for the design of terrestrial broadband radio access
systems operating in a frequency range from 3 to 60 GHz„”
Recommendation ITU-R P.1410-6, 2023.
[14] A. Saboor, E. Vinogradov, Z. Cui, and S. Pollin, “Probabil-
ity of Line of Sight Evaluation in Urban Environments using
3D Simulator,” in IEEE International Black Sea Conference
on Communications and Networking (BlackSeaCom), 2023,
pp. 135–140.
[15] A. Saboor, Z. Cui, E. Vinogradov, and S. Pollin, “Air-to-
Ground Channel Model for Pedestrian and Vehicle Users
in General Urban Environments,” IEEE Antennas and
Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 227–231,
2025.
[16] Q. Feng, J. McGeehan, E. Tameh, and A. Nix, “Path loss
models for air-to-ground radio channels in urban environ-
ments,” in IEEE 63rd Vehicular Technology Conference,
vol. 6, 2006, pp. 2901–2905.
[17] Claussen, “Eﬀicient modelling of channel maps with cor-
related shadow fading in mobile radio systems,” in 2005
IEEE 16th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor
and Mobile Radio Communications, vol. 1, 2005, pp. 512–
516.
[18] M. Bucur, T. Sorensen, R. Amorim, M. Lopez, I. Z.
Kovacs, and P. Mogensen, “Validation of large-scale prop-
agation characteristics for UAVs within urban environ-
ment,” in 2019 IEEE 90th Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC2019-Fall), 2019, pp. 1–6.
[19] “User Equipment (UE) radio transmission and reception,
document 38.101,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project,
Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network, 2018.
[20] A. Colpaert, Z. Cui, E. Vinogradov, and S. Pollin, “3D
Non-Stationary Channel Measurement and Analysis for
MaMIMO-UAV Communications,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 73, no. 5, pp. 6061–6072, 2024.
