3D printed waveguides for optogenetics applications: design opti-
mization and optical characterization
Giorgio Scordo*
Kostas Kanellopulos Surangrat Thongkorn Samuel Tavares da Silva Maraschin Kam-
biz Ghaseminasab Evgeniy Shkondin Deepshika Arasu Stephan Sylvest Keller Arto Rainer Heiskanen
Marta Perez Pereira Jenny Emn´eus*
Dr. G. Scordo
Electronic Engineering Department, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via del Politecnico 1, 00133 Rome,
Italy
Email Address: giorgio.scordo@uniroma2.it
Dr. K. Kanellopulos
TU Wien, Institute of Sensor and Actuator Systems, Gusshausstrasse 27-29, 1040 Vienna, Austria
Dr. S. Thongkorn
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800,
Denmark
S. T. D. S. Maraschin
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800,
Denmark
K. Ghaseminasab
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800,
Denmark
Dr. E. Shkondin
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800,
Denmark
D. Arasu
Hospital Cl´ınic de Barcelona - Fundaci´o de Recerca Clin´ıc Barcelona - IDIBAPS - University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
Prof. S.S. Keller
National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization (DTU Nanolab), Technical University of
Denmark, Ørsteds Plads Building 347, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800 Denmark
Dr. A. R. Heiskanen
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800,
Denmark
Prof. M. P. Pereira
The Institute for Molecular Biology of the Autonomous University of Madrid, Madrid, 20049, Spain
Prof. J. Emn´eus
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800,
Denmark Email Address: jemn@dtu.dk
Keywords: Optogenetics, 3D printing, Optical waveguide, FEM modeling
Optogenetics has emerged as a powerful tool for disease modeling, enabling precise control of cellular activities through light stim-
ulation and providing a valuable insights into disease mechanisms and therapeutic possibilities. Innovative materials and technolo-
gies such as micro-LEDs, optical ﬁbers and micro/nano probes have been developed to allow precise spatial and temporal control of
light delivery to target cells. Recent advances in 3D printing have further enhanced optogenetic applications by enabling the fabri-
cation of implantable, customizable, and miniaturized light stimulation systems with high spatial resolution. In this study, we intro-
duce a novel concept of a 3D printed light delivery system for brain organoid stimulation exploring the capabilities of projection mi-
crostereolithography (PµSL). We characterized the optical properties of the high-resolution acrylate-based 3D print resin, i.e., refrac-
tive index and extinction coeﬃcient, to evaluate if the light transmission eﬃciency might limit the performance of the optogenetic
stimulation systems. Finite element method simulations were employed to optimize the 3D printed design. An optogenetic setup
was developed for optimal light delivery, and initial tests with optogenetically modiﬁed cells showed light-induced dopamine release
with a stimulation eﬃciency of 2.8%, conﬁrming the 3D printed waveguide functionality and guiding future optimization. Our results
demonstrate that this light stimulation tool oﬀers strong potential for advancing customizable optogenetic applications.
1
arXiv:2511.15420v1  [physics.optics]  19 Nov 2025


1
Introduction
Optogenetics is a technique that integrates optics and genetics to control the activity of speciﬁc cells
in living tissue, typically neurons [1] or cardiac cells [2], with high spatial and temporal precision. This
method relies on light-sensitive proteins, such as channelrhodopsins [3] and halorhodopsins [4], which
can be genetically introduced into cells to enable temporally controlled photostimulation. Optogenetics
has revolutionized neuroscience by allowing researchers to investigate neural circuits, understand brain
function, and develop potential therapeutic applications for neurological disorders [5]. For an optoge-
netic system to function eﬀectively, several key parameters must be carefully considered, including wave-
length, intensity, divergence, and penetration depth of light [6, 7]. These factors collectively inﬂuence the
eﬃciency of light propagation within the target tissues, the precision of stimulation, and the overall di-
mensions of the implanted system. Building on these considerations, a variety of device architectures
have been developed to deliver optical stimulation in vivo, most commonly based on optical ﬁbers cou-
pled to external light sources or micro-LED-based implants, which have proven reliable and user-friendly
(Figure 1) [8, 9, 10, 11] . Among these, optical ﬁber–based systems remain the most established ap-
proach for delivering light to deep brain regions, oﬀering robust and controllable illumination; however,
their rigid geometry and intrinsic light scattering within biological tissue limit spatial precision and uni-
form light distribution, particularly in volumetric or heterogeneous 3D models [7, 12]. In contrast, micro-
LED-based systems oﬀer improved spatial selectivity, mechanical ﬂexibility, and reduced invasiveness,
representing a promising alternative for chronic or localized optogenetic stimulation [12]. Advanced de-
signs, including tapered and multifunctional ﬁbers integrating micro-optical structures [13] wireless im-
plantable micro-LED probes [14] and and thin-ﬁlm microscale LED platforms [12] have partially miti-
gated these drawbacks by improving light homogeneity, spatial control, and reducing shadowing eﬀects.
Despite these advancements, current systems remain limited when applied to three-dimensional (3D) tis-
sue environments, where optogenetic models such as spheroids or organoids are implanted, as restricted
light penetration and proximity constraints hinder homogeneous and eﬃcient photostimulation. Address-
ing these challenges requires not only advances in device architecture but also in the optical materials
used for light delivery. Therefore, materials selected for constructing waveguides capable of stimulating
3D tissue models must exhibit a well-deﬁned refractive index, low optical absorption in the visible range,
high transparency, and biocompatibility to achieve eﬃcient and reproducible photostimulation [15].
Several materials have been investigated for their suitability in optogenetic applications, each with dis-
tinct advantages and limitations. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is widely used due to its ﬂexibility and
biocompatibility; however, its high light absorption and low refractive index limit its eﬀectiveness for op-
tical applications [16]. Parylene-C oﬀers excellent biocompatibility and moisture resistance, but it poses
challenges in structuring complex 3D geometries, restricting its adaptability for intricate optogenetic sys-
tems [17]. Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) provides high optical clarity, yet its brittleness and me-
chanical instability hinder its long-term reliability [18].
One of the most used materials is SU-8 [19], which is valued for its high refractive index for light con-
ﬁnement (∼1.63 at 470 nm, ∼1.60 at 590 nm) [20], and its low absorption coeﬃcient of ∼0.002 at 470
nm [21]. These optical properties make it an excellent candidate for waveguide applications. However,
SU-8 is an epoxy-based negative photoresist that must be processed in a cleanroom via photolithography
and is, due to its multi-stage curing, incompatible with methods intended to form high-aspect-ratio 3D
architectures.
Recent advances in 3D printing technologies have introduced novel materials that could overcome the
aforementioned limitations [22]. The ability to fabricate complex 3D optogenetic system using micro-
scale additive manufacturing allows for precise control of light propagation and spatial distribution. Sev-
eral 3D-printable materials have been explored for optogenetic stimulation: Methacrylate-based resins
oﬀer high optical transparency and mechanical stability for implantable optogenetic devices [23]. Poly(ethylene
glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA)-based hydrogels are biocompatible with tunable optical properties and al-
low light-guiding in biological environments [24]. Silicon-based hybrid materials combine the advantages
of polymers and inorganics to enhance optical performance in neural interfaces [25]. Although several
photopolymer materials have been reported for optogenetic applications, acrylate-based resins remain
2


Figure 1: Schematic representation of organoid photostimulation systems. (Left) 2D photoexcitation approaches: (top) full
implanted Micro-LED; (bottom) partially implanted cannula coupled to an optical ﬁber. (Right) Innovative 3D optoge-
netic stimulation system proposed in this work for 3D optogenetic cells and organoids stimulation.
largely unexplored, and their optical behavior and waveguide design principles are poorly understood.
In this study, we investigated the fabrication of a three-dimensional optical waveguide using projection
microstereolithography (PµSL) to enable controlled light delivery to optogenetically modiﬁed neuronal
cells. The Boston Micro Fabrication (BMF) high-resolution acrylate resin was selected and systemati-
cally characterized in terms of refractive index, extinction coeﬃcient, and light transmission eﬃciency to
evaluate its suitability for optical stimulation. Based on these data, a 3D optical system was designed
and optimized through Finite Element Method (FEM) simulations, and an optogenetic setup incorpo-
rating a custom-built Optical Motherboard was developed to assess light delivery performance (Figure 1,
right). To validate the functionality of the 3D-printed system, a proof-of-concept experiment was con-
ducted in which light transmitted through the BMF waveguide was used to stimulate optogenetically
modiﬁed dopaminergic cells diﬀerentiated on pyrolytic carbon ﬁbers [26], positioned within the 3D printed
cavity. Light-induced dopamine release was quantitatively detected on the carbon ﬁbers acting as work-
ing electrodes, conﬁrming the eﬀectiveness of the 3D printed waveguide for precise light transmission
and functional photostimulation.
2
Methods
2.1
Optical properties of BMF resin
To systematically assess the suitability of biocompatible HTL Yellow 20 µm resin from Boston Micro
Fabrication (BMF), USA, for optogenetic applications, we conducted a comprehensive investigation of
its optical properties, quantifying its refractive index (n) and extinction coeﬃcient (κ), which serve as
key inputs for realistic FEM simulations. Additionally, measurements of transmitted light intensity and
divergence were performed to validate the performance of the light source during the 3D-printed optical
waveguide testing.
3


2.2
Optogenetic setup
2.1.1
Refractive index and extinction coeﬃcient
Ellipsometry was used to characterize the refractive index (n) of the BMF resin in the wavelength range
from 300 to 1000 nm. The measurements were carried out using disks 3D printed (Figure 2a) with PµSL
3D printer (microArch® S140, BMF, USA). The optical dispersion n(λ) of the resin was measured us-
ing an Angle Spectroscopic Ellipsometer M-2000XI (J.A. Woollam, US). In ellipsometry, key optical pa-
rameters are determined via analysis of the changes in the light polarization upon reﬂection. The mea-
surements were performed at six diﬀerent angles of incidence (45°-70°, with steps of 5°), to enhance the
precision of extracted optical parameters [27].
The extinction coeﬃcient (κ) was determined with spectrophotometry due to its higher absorption sen-
sitivity compared to ellipsometry (κ ∼10−3) [28, 29]. For this purpose, a 3D printed BMF samples was
designed in the form of a cuvette with dimensions of 1 cm × 1 cm × 5 cm (see supplementary informa-
tion S2A). Spectrophotometry is a widely used optical technique for determining the refractive index
and extinction coeﬃcient of materials by analyzing their absorbance and transmittance across diﬀerent
wavelengths [30, 31]. In this study, a UV-Vis-NIR Evolution Spectrophotometer 201/220 (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, US) was employed to measure the absorbance A = −log10(T) of the resin sample of thickness
h = 1 cm, over a wavelength range of 400-800 nm, where T = It/I0 is the experimental optical transmit-
tance, with I0 and It being the input and transmitted intensity, respectively. From the absorbance, it is
possible to determine the extinction coeﬃcient according to [32]
κ(λ) = λα(λ)
4π
,
(1)
where λ is the probing wavelength, and α(λ) = A(λ)/h is the absorption coeﬃcient of the material,
given in units [1/m] (for more details see supplementary information S2B).
2.1.2
Intensity and divergence of the transmitted light
The transmitted intensity (It) quantiﬁes the amount of optical power that passes through a material af-
ter partial absorption and scattering. It is inﬂuenced by key factors such as the absorption coeﬃcient
α(λ), material thickness h, and the intensity of the incident light I0. To determine It, three disks (A, B,
and C) with a diameter of 15 mm and thicknesses of 0.5, 1, and 1.2 mm, respectively, were fabricated
using BMF resin (Figure 2a). The disks were subsequently placed in a plastic holder between the LED
light source (LED470 with blue light and LED590 with orange light, Thorlabs, USA) and the photodi-
ode sensor (S121C Thorlabs, USA) connected to a power meter (PM121D Thorlabs, USA) as illustrated
in Figure 2b. The LED was kept continuously emitting for 5 min to assess potential ﬂuctuations in light
output, while the transmitted intensity through the material was recorded over this period using the
photodiode.
The light divergence governs the spatial distribution and expansion of the light beam as it propagates
through a medium. For the present application, high divergence of the light source would be detrimen-
tal, as it will reduce the intensity available for photostimulation. To quantify its contribution to the over-
all performance in light delivery, the divergence angle of the LEDs used in this work was characterized in
terms of the half-power angle θ1/2, i.e., the zenith angle with respect to the optical axis that deﬁnes a
cone containing 50% of the power emitted by the LED source [33]. It was measured with the photodiode
positioned at distances of 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 10 cm from the LED source with no BMF resin structure in
between, as shown in Figure 2c. The measurements were carried out in the dark (see Figure 2d) with a
light exposure of 5 min for each position.
2.2
Optogenetic setup
To assess the suitability of the optogenetic stimulation systems proposed in this work for optogenetic ap-
plications, we designed and implemented a specialized experimental setup, as depicted in Figure 3a.
4


2.2
Optogenetic setup
Figure 2: a-b Optical transmission characterization setup. a 3D printed disks with diﬀerent thickness: hA
=
0.5 mm,
hB = 1.0 mm, hC = 1.2 mm. b A schematic of the experimental setup. d-e Light divergence characterization setup. a A
schematic view of the distribution and the expansion of the light beam. b A lateral view of the experimental setup.
5


2.3
FEM modeling
Figure 3: Experimental setup and FEM modeling. a Schematic sketch of the optogenetic system testing . b Deﬁnition
of the power detector (light red arrows indicate the scattered rays absorbed and measured by the detector). c Design of
the device, with a focus on the main geometrical parameters used for optimization. d Deﬁnition of the light source at the
bottom surface of input intensity I0 (the red arrows indicate the directionality of the emission).
This setup integrates multiple fabrication techniques, including cleanroom processing, laser microma-
chining, and high-precision 3D printing, to create a functional optogenetic waveguide, featuring a hollow
cylindrical geometry with several openings patterned in its walls (Figure 1, right; Figure 3a).
First, a 2D electrochemical sensor was fabricated on a silicon wafer using a cleanroom fabrication pro-
cess (for details see supporting information SI, Section S4), resulting in gold reference and counter elec-
trodes (see Figure 3a). Subsequently, the silicon chips electrodes were engraved obtaining precise aper-
ture on either side of the electrode, allowing light to traverse the silicon substrate and couple eﬃciently
into the 3D-printed waveguide structure (for more details see SI, Section S3C). The cylindrical struc-
ture, optimized through FEM simulation (Section 2.3), was designed using the CAD software SolidWorks
(SolidWorks, USA) and exported as an STL ﬁle. The ﬁle was then sliced by the software ChituBox (Chi-
tuBox, China) using 5 µm layer thickness and printed using the BMF PµSL 3D printer adjusted to 1 s
exposure time at 45% intensity (for more details see SI, Section S3C). The 3D printed waveguide struc-
ture was precisely aligned over the working area of the electrode, ensuring that the surrounding wall of
the cylinder was positioned above the cavity. This design lets light pass through the material, scatter oﬀ
the patterned structures, and reach the optogenetic cell culture on the pyrolyzed ﬁber (Figure 3a, right).
2.3
FEM modeling
Finite element simulations (COMSOL® Multiphysics, v5.5) were carried out to determine the impact
of the geometrical parameters on the optical intensity of the transmitted light from the cylindrical 3D
printed waveguide to its central axis, available for photostimulation (Idet, light red arrows in Figure 3b).
The Geometrical Optics Physics was exploited with a focus on the Ray Tracing Study, as the geometri-
cal features of the device are much larger than the optical wavelength (≫λ). Diﬀerent 3D waveguides
were explored in terms of the geometry of the openings (Figure 3c), with the number of rows of holes,
6


2.4
Culturing of optogenetically modiﬁed cells
nrow, number of columns, ncol, and cylinder’s external radius, rcyl, being the optimized parameters. For
all the diﬀerent combinations, the height of the cylinder (hcyl = 1.2 mm—for more info about this choice,
see Figure 5d and relative discussion), radius of the hole (rhole = 50 µm), and thickness of the wall
(tcyl = 50 µm) were kept ﬁxed. For each simulation, a light source with uniform intensity distribution
was deﬁned at the bottom of the probe, from which the rays are released with a conical directional vec-
tor pointing along the z-axis with a conical angle of 7°(red arrows in Figure 3d). The total input power
was set to P0 = 0.1 W to match the experimental values used in this work. The rays travel within the
cylindrical probe and are partially transmitted toward its central axis (light red arrows in Figure 3b).
The transmitted intensity available for photostimulation Idet is then evaluated with a cylindrical ray de-
tector positioned along the central axis (representing the pyrolyzed ﬁber of Figure 3a, right, with a ra-
dius rdet = 125 µm and height hdet = 1.2 mm, at a distance of hcyl/4 from the bottom), and evalu-
ated as the ratio Pdet/Adet between the optical power impinging on the detector Pdet and its useful area
Adet = 2πrdethdet + πr2
det (for more details about the distribution of the optical power on the detector, see
SI S1). An optimization of the mesh was carried out upon a convergence analysis with a selected maxi-
mum element size of tcyl/2 (with tcyl being the smallest geometry feature). For the optical properties of
the 3D printed waveguide, the experimental results described in Section 3.1 have been used as input pa-
rameters.
2.4
Culturing of optogenetically modiﬁed cells
10 cm long segments of optical ﬁber with fused silica core (#57-086, Edmund Optics Ltd., UK) were py-
rolyzed (Figure 3a, right) and subsequently treated with oxygen plasma as previously described to en-
hance the wettability of the pyrolytic carbon [26]. Following plasma treatment, the ﬁbers were coated
with poly-L-lysine (PLL-P6282, Merck Sigma-Aldrich, US) at a concentration of 50 µg mL−1 in PBS
for 2 h in an incubator. Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) modiﬁed human ventral mesencephalic neural stem
cells (hVM1-Bcl-XL-ChR2-mCherry) [34, 26] were then seeded at a pipetting 50 µL of a cell suspension
(cell density of 2 · 106 cells mL−1) per ﬁber (only a 5 mm section of each ﬁber exposed during cell seed-
ing) and cultured for 24 h in growth medium containing DMEM/F12 with Gluta-MAX (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc Inc., USA), supplemented with 6 g L−1 glucose and non-essential amino acid solution (100x di-
lution) from Merck, USA, 5 mM HEPES, 0.5% AlbuMAX, N-2 supplement (100x dilution), and peni-
cillin/streptomycin (100x dilution) all acquired from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., USA, as well as 20 ng
L−1 each of Recombinant Human Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) and Recombinant Human Fibroblast
Growth Factor (FGF) from Bio-Techne Ltd., USA. After 24 hours, cell diﬀerentiation was initiated by
substituting the EGF and FGF with 1 mM dibutyryladenosine 3’, 5’-cylic monophosphate sodium salt
(Merck, USA) and 2 ng mL−1 recombinant human glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)
(Bio-Techne Ltd., USA) and continued for 10 days. During culturing and diﬀerentiation, the cell loaded
carbon ﬁbers were maintained in a humidiﬁed incubator at 37 °C under 95% air/5% CO2.
2.5
Neurotransmitter measurement
The ability of the diﬀerentiated hVM1-Bcl-XL-ChR2-mCherry cells to release dopamine upon light-induced
and chemical stimulation was evaluated by using chronoamperometry. The electrochemical measurement
setup comprised a 3-electrode conﬁguration, with a pyrolytic-carbon-coated optical ﬁber as the working
electrode (WE), a gold counter electrode (CE), and a reference electrode (RE), all connected to a CH
Instruments 1010 potentiostat (USA). During the recording of the baseline and dopamine release, the
carbon ﬁber WE was poised at 0.5 V vs. the RE. During the measurements, the optical ﬁber was in-
serted into the lumen of the 3D printed waveguide under the guidance of a micromanipulator. The sil-
icon chip, on which the optogenetic waveguide had been 3D printed, was placed in a micromilled vial
fabricated of PMMA. For photostimulation of cells, light pulses were triggered using an Optical Moth-
erboard (OpM) equipped with a blue light emitting LED (470 nm) (for details, see SI, Section S3A). As
a control, chemical stimulation of the cells was conducted by pipetting high-K+ diﬀerentiation medium
(additional 450 mM of KCl) into the chamber, where the 3D printed waveguide and cell loaded optical
7


ﬁber were placed, to raise the K+ concentration to ∼150 mM.
3
Results and discussion
The optogenetic 3D stimulation systems designed and characterized in this study features a hollow cylin-
drical geometry, with openings patterned on its lateral surface (Figure 1, right; Figure 3a). This geom-
etry allows for central placement of the target cell, ensuring symmetric and uniform light delivery from
the surrounding openings. The perforations in the 3D printed waveguide wall not only permit an eﬃ-
cient light delivery to the cell during photostimulation, but also provide ﬂuidic exchange routes, enabling
simultaneous light stimulation and sampling. Such integration is particularly advantageous for minimally
invasive neuromodulation applications, where both controlled light delivery and ﬂuid handling are essen-
tial.
3.1
Optical properties of BMF resin
3.1.1
Refractive index and extinction coeﬃcient
The optical properties of materials used in optogenetic stimulation systems are fundamental for light
propagation and interaction within optogenetic culture targets. In particular, the refractive index (n)
and the extinction coeﬃcient (κ) play pivotal roles. The refractive index dictates the speed, direction,
and dispersion of light as it traverses a medium, directly inﬂuencing the optical conﬁnement, waveguid-
ing eﬃciency, and mode propagation in optoelectronic and photonic applications. In contrast, the extinc-
tion coeﬃcient accounts for the optical attenuation due to the absorption and scattering of power by the
material [35, 32]. These parameters are critical in determining the eﬃciency and precision of optogenetic
stimulation.
To the best of our knowledge, the n and κ of the BMF 3D printed resin at the key optogenetic wave-
lengths of 470 nm and 590 nm have not previously been reported in the literature.
Ellipsometry measurements were carried out using PµSL 3D printed disks (Figure 2a) to determine the
refractive index n of the BMF resin in the 300-1000 nm wavelength range. The experimental results in
Figure 4a show spectra of n measured at diﬀerent incident angles ϕ between the normal to the sample
surface and the impinging light beam. As can be observed, the results are consistent, presenting minimal
variation across the various angles of incidence, further highlighting the stability of the optical proper-
ties of the resin. Based on these measurements, the determined refractive indices at the two main wave-
lengths of interest, 470 nm (blue light) and 590 nm (orange light), were n = 1.52 and n = 1.51, respec-
tively, similar to what reported for other 3D print resins [36, 37].
Spectrophotometric measurements in the wavelength range 400-800 nm were carried out using cuvettes
ﬁlled with cured BMF resin to determine κ at 470 nm and 590 nm. Figure 4b shows the measured trans-
mittance T (black solid curve) and the calculated absorbance A (red dashed curve)
A(λ) = −log[T(λ)],
(2)
as a function of λ. The BMF resin shows an exponential reduction in absorbance A with increasing λ,
which is consistent with its formulation for 3D printing at around 405 nm. This resin is design to absorb
strongly at this wavelength due to the presence of photoinitiators, which conﬁne polymerization to thin
layers during the printing process.
Based on these results and calculations using Equation 1, the determined extinction coeﬃcients were
κ(470 nm) = 3.55 × 10−6 and κ(590 nm) = 2.18 × 10−6.
The experimental results discussed above were compared with the complex refractive index (n + iκ) of
other materials exploited in optogenetics at wavelengths of 470 nm and 590 nm, as shown in Figure 4c
and d. The plots present the imaginary part (κ) on a logarithmic scale on the y-axis, and the real part
n on the x-axis. At both wavelengths, BMF resin (represented by a star marker) exhibits a relatively
high refractive index among the organic materials, closely approaching values typical of inorganic ma-
terials such as SiN and SiO2. Importantly, BMF resin maintains an extremely low extinction coeﬃcient
8


3.1
Optical properties of BMF resin
Figure 4: Optical characterization of BMF 3D print resin and comparison to other materials. a Ellipsometric determina-
tion of n as a function of the excitation wavelength λ for diﬀerent incident angles ϕ. b Spectrophotometric measurements
of light transmission T as a function of λ (black solid curve) together with the corresponding calculated absorbance A (red
dashed curve). c-d Comparison of the BMF resin (n, κ) with the other materials exploited in optogenetics at 470 nm (c)
and 590 nm (d) probing wavelength.
9


3.1
Optical properties of BMF resin
(κ ∼10−6), indicating minimal optical absorption, which is a desirable characteristic for transparent
optoelectronics devices. In comparison, inorganic materials like Si and SiC show signiﬁcantly higher κ
values, particularly at 590 nm, where their optical losses reach up to three orders of magnitude greater
than those of BMF resin. Organic materials, such as PEGDA, PDMS, and Polyalkylene (PAG), exhibit-
ing low extinction coeﬃcients, have considerably lower refractive indices (around n ∼1.4 and 1.5), which
may limit their utility in applications requiring high contrast in n. Notably, SU-8, another commonly
used organic material for optical waveguide fabrication, shows similar optical transparency (κ value) to
BMF but with a slightly lower n. These ﬁndings position BMF resin as a promising candidate material
for optogenetics applications.
3.1.2
Transmitted light intensity and divergence
In addition to the intrinsic optical properties of the material, the characteristics of the light source sig-
niﬁcantly inﬂuence the outcomes of optogenetic experiments. Light divergence aﬀects beam expansion
and focusing capabilities, directly impacting spatial resolution and targeted stimulation. This parame-
ter is essential for the design of high-performance optogenetic stimulation systems, as it inﬂuences light
penetration, scattering, and intensity distribution toward the target. Moreover, the transmitted inten-
sity is determined by both the optical and geometrical properties of the material, i.e., absorption coeﬃ-
cient and thickness, and the light source parameters, including incident intensity and wavelength. The
transmitted intensity ultimately deﬁnes the energy available for optogenetic protein activation and sub-
sequent cellular responses. These considerations are particularly crucial in optogenetics, where eﬃcient
light delivery is necessary for precise neural stimulation, especially in three-dimensional cell cultures such
as organoids and spheroids.
To achieve eﬃcient activation of optically sensitive proteins as those used for optogenetics [38], it is cru-
cial to optimize light delivery by minimizing the divergence while maximizing the transmitted intensity.
We characterized the divergence properties of the light emitted from the two distinct LED sources (470
nm and 590 nm), without BMF in between, as well as the corresponding light transmission T through
the BMF resin, analyzing how it is inﬂuenced by both the emission characteristics of the LEDs and the
optical properties of the BMF resin.
As seen in Figure 5a and b, both LEDs exhibit an exponential decay of their emitted optical power with
increasing LED-photodiode sensor distance d according to
Pdet(d) = P0e−βd,
(3)
from which a divergence coeﬃcient β of 22 m−1 and 59 m−1 has been extracted for the LED470 and LED590,
respectively.
For LED470, approximately 80% of its total emitted power P0 can be detected within the ﬁrst 5 mm (Fig-
ure 5a). For LED590, this value reduces to 70% (Figure 5b). The small divergence at short distances is a
sign of a strong directivity, i.e., reduced angular dispersion, of the LEDs. From the measurements in Fig-
ure 5a and b, the half-power angle θ1/2 of each LED was extracted according to
θ1/2 = arctan
 rdet
d1/2
!
,
(4)
where rdet and d1/2 are the radius of the detector’s active area (here 4.75 mm), and the LED-photodiode
distance at which the detected power is Pdet(d1/2) = P0/2. For the LED470, a θ1/2 = 8.54°was found,
closely aligning with the reported value of 7°[39]. For the LED590, a θ1/2 = 23°was found, again closely
aligning to the nominal value of 20°[40]. The corresponding intensity distribution are shown in Figure 5c
(solid curves), indicating an excellent agreement with the nominal proﬁles (dashed curves). These results
highlight the fact that the LEDs present an intensity distribution more similar to the Gaussian rather
than Lambertian proﬁle [33].
In Figure 5d, the optical intensity of the LED470 measured as a function of the thickness hcyl of the BMF
resin disk samples, is displayed for an input intensity of I0 = 1.1 mW mm−2, with the LED and PD di-
rectly in contact with the disks (d = 0 mm), exhibiting a monotonically decreasing trend with increasing
10


3.1
Optical properties of BMF resin
Figure 5: Characterization of light transmission and divergence. a-b Detected power Pdet emitted by the (a) LED470 (blue
curve) and (b) LED590 (orange curve) as a function of the LED-photodetector distance (d), with no resin in between. The
performed curve ﬁtting (black solid curve) according to Equation 3 gives a divergence coeﬃcient (β) of (a) 22 m−1 and (b)
59 m−1. The dashed lines indicate Pdet
=
P0/2 (horizontal) and the corresponding d (vertical). c Comparison between
the experimental (solid curves) and nominal (dashed curves) intensity proﬁles for the LED470 (blue) and LED590 (orange).
Both proﬁles are Gaussian [33]. d-e Intensity attenuation for (d) LED470 and (e) LED590 as a function of the disk thick-
ness hcyl. In d, an absorption coeﬃcient α
=
250 m−1 has been extracted based on linear regression. The horizontal
dashed line indicates the threshold intensity for ChR2 photostimulation. Solid lines indicates the intensity reduction within
the BMF disk, for diﬀerent LED-to-disk distance d.
11


3.2
Modeling and 3D-printing of the optogenetic stimulation system
disk thickness. Upon linear regression, an absorption coeﬃcient α(470nm) = 250 m−1 was extracted,
which is in line with the spectrophotometric measurements. For the maximum thickness of 1.2 mm, the
detected intensity reaches approximately 0.75 mW mm−2, which is close to the ChR2 activation thresh-
old of 0.7 mW mm−2 (the red dashed line). Beyond this thickness, the transmitted light intensity may
no longer be suﬃcient to eﬀectively activate the opsins, hence the value of hcyl = 1.2 mm was chosen
for the fabrication of the ﬁnal device and informed the FEM simulations. Figure 5d also presents the
calculated detected intensity for diﬀerent LED-to-resin disk distance d, using input intensity extracted
from the power distribution shown in Figure 5a. The results show that for LED-to-disk distances d < 5
mm, the detected intensity exceeds the photostimulation threshold (Idet ≥Ith) across all considered disk
thicknesses hcyl. This suggests an upper limit of approximately 5 mm for the LED-to-waveguide separa-
tion to achieve eﬀective optogenetic stimulation.
With input intensity I0 = 0.13 mW mm−2, the LED590 exhibits a less pronounced attenuation pattern
(Figure 5e). The intensity declines here more gradually, stabilizing at approximately 0.1 mW/mm2 for
hcyl ≥0.5 mm. This behavior indicates that at 590 nm, the BMF resin exhibits lower absorption and
scattering, leading to a reduced optical attenuation compared to the 470 nm LED.
Our ﬁndings demonstrate that the LED470 should provide suﬃcient energy for opsin activation, with a
critical constraint on the maximum permissible distance between the light source and the 3D printed
waveguide. Speciﬁcally, to minimize optical losses and ensure eﬀective opsin activation, this distance
should not exceed ≈5 mm (Figure 5d for λ = 470 nm). These insights are particularly relevant for 3D
cell cultures, such as organoids and spheroids, where eﬃcient light penetration is essential to maintain
adequate intensity for eﬀective photostimulation.
3.2
Modeling and 3D-printing of the optogenetic stimulation system
The FEM modeling was carried out as shown in Figure 6. In the ﬁrst step, three diﬀerent hole geome-
tries (circle, square, star, Figure 6a) were tested for a ﬁxed number of holes (nrow = ncol = 4) and ex-
ternal radius (rcyl = 250 µm) of the cylinder. Figure 6b shows a comparison of the three diﬀerent hole
geometries for an input intensity I0 = 3.3 · 103 mW mm −2, indicating that the detected light intensity
Idet is greater than the threshold intensity Ith ≈0.7 mW mm−2 that is required for photostimulation
of ChR2 [41] (dashed gray horizontal line). The star geometry shows the best performance, followed by
the squares and circles. The main rationale is the increased number of discontinuities encountered by
the optical rays when interacting with the star shaped openings. Hence, the star geometry was chosen
for further optimization. It is worth noting that a vertex number higher than eight for the stars could
further improve the light delivery of the 3D printed waveguide, but with a more stringent requirement
on the spatial resolution of the printing process. Hence, eight vertices were chosen to simplify the device
fabrication process, without compromising the performance in transmittance.
Next, the number of rows, nrow, was varied along with their vertical spacing (pitch), due to the constraint
imposed by the ﬁxed 3D waveguide height hcyl (see Figure 5d) and the design choice of maintaining equidis-
tant rows. The corresponding FEM results are displayed in Figure 6c. Idet increases with nrow for a small
values, followed by a plateau for nrow ≥5. This trend arises from two combined eﬀects. First, as more
rows are added (with decreasing pitch), the lowest row of holes is positioned closer to the bottom of the
3D printed waveguide, near the incident light source. This reduces absorption losses in the BMF resin
before the light reaches the ﬁrst scattering interface, increasing the amount of power available for redi-
rection toward the center. Second, light that is not scattered at this ﬁrst stage continues upward, where
it encounters additional rows. With more rows and shorter spacing between them, less light is absorbed
between the rows, allowing more optical power to reach the detector. Beyond nrow ≥5, this eﬀect satu-
rates, indicating that the majority of useful scattering occurs within the ﬁrst four rows. In Figure 6c, the
trend is further highlighted by an exponential ﬁtting curve of the form Idet = a + becnrow, where a = 3.53,
b = −3.57, and c = −0.44. Based on these ﬁndings and with future in vivo applications in mind, a value
of nrow = 7 was selected (red circle in Figure 6c). This choice ensures a suﬃcient number of outlet path-
ways for solution containing the targeted cells, especially under conﬁgurations where the cell suspension
is expected to be introduced from the top of the cylindrical waveguide. In such cases, the side openings
12


3.2
Modeling and 3D-printing of the optogenetic stimulation system
Figure 6: FEM-based device optimization. a Hole geometries considered for the optimization. b Idet as a function of three
diﬀerent hole geometries. c Idet for star shaped holes as a function of the number of rows nrow (ncol = 4 kept constant). d
Idet as a function of ncol (nrow = 7 kept constant). e Idet as a function of rcyl (ncol = 8 and nrow = 7 kept constant) for
a cylindrical lumen (star markers), and conical lumen with a ﬁber (purple triangles) and spheroid detector (purple circles).
f Transmittance of an inﬁnitely long full cylinder (BMF material) as a function of the ray travel distance d for the two
wavelengths of interest. g SEM micrograph of the ﬁnal fabricated device (see dimensions in the main text).
13


3.2
Modeling and 3D-printing of the optogenetic stimulation system
facilitate outﬂow and reduce the risk of clogging, which could otherwise occur due to cell aggregation ob-
structing the device holes during experiments [42].
In the subsequent step, the eﬀect of the number of columns ncol on the total detected intensity was eval-
uated, starting from the previously optimized value of nrow = 7. As shown in Figure 6d, increasing ncol
beyond 4 led to a further enhancement of Idet, with gains up to approximately 50 %. This increase is
primarily attributed to enhanced scattering of the principal rays by the additional columns in the ﬁrst
row. The eﬀect progressively saturates for ncol ≥8. Also in this case, the trend is highlighted by the
same exponential ﬁtting curve as for Figure 6c, with a = 6.502, b = −6.517, and c = −0.135. Based on
these results, a design of ncol = 8 was chosen.
All the previous simulations were carried out for an external hollow cylinder radius of rcyl = 250 µm,
while keeping the walls thickness constant at tcyl = 50 µm. Although this compact geometry could sup-
port eﬃcient light delivery, it poses practical challenges: the small in-plane dimension can make the align-
ment of the pyrolytic ﬁber (diameter of 250 µm) used for the experimental optogenetics characterization
extremely diﬃcult (see Section 3.3). To asses how increasing the cylinder radius aﬀects the optical per-
formance, an analysis of the impact of rcyl on the detected light intensity was also carried out. As shown
in Figure 6e, Idet decreases signiﬁcantly with increasingly larger devices (black star markers); doubling
the radius rcyl leads to an intensity drop of nearly two orders of magnitude—falling more than one or-
der below the threshold Ith). This trend is explained by the angular distribution of scattered rays: as de-
tailed in SI Section S1, the majority of rays contributing to Idet are scattered at zenith angles θz < 45°.
When the cylinder radius increases, these rays intersect the central axis at proportionally higher posi-
tions, following z = rcyl tan(θz). Consequently, a growing number of rays escape the probe’s internal vol-
ume before reaching the detector, reducing the eﬀective light collection. In contrast, rays scattered per-
pendicular to the wall (θz = 90°) would intersect the z-axis at a ﬁxed height, making their contribution
independent of the in-plane dimensions of the probe.
To compensate for this reduction, the internal wall of the hollow cylinder was designed with a conical
geometry, with the top radius being equal to rcyl −tcyl, and the bottom to 2/3 rcyl (see schematics in
Figure 6e, right). The corresponding results are indicated by the purple downward triangles, showing a
smaller decrease in detected intensity for increasing rcyl compared to the original design. This is mainly
due to the scattering occurring at the ﬁrst rows of holes, which even in the modiﬁed design have a small
in-plane distance from the detector.
Based on this FEM model, the ﬁnal choice of device to be fabricated consists of: 1) a hollow cylinder
with an external radius of rcyl = 0.6 mm, having a conical internal wall geometry with a bottom radius
of 0.4 mm, to make the alignment of the pyrolytic ﬁber easier (see Section 3.3); 2) star shaped holes, ar-
ranged in 7 rows and 12 columns (ncol was increased to compensate for the reduction in Idet due to the
increase in rcyl). The FEM result corresponding to this design is indicated by the red circle in Figure
6e with Idet ≈Ith. Working around the stimulation threshold intensity could have the advantage of re-
ducing the excitation volume, better targeting the cells to be stimulated [41]. These results were com-
pared with the case in which an organoid of radius rorg = 125 µm was used as detector (centered within
the hollow cylinder at a height of hcyl/2 from the bottom, represented by the purple circles in Figure 6e,
right). Idet is one order of magnitude smaller than that observed for the ﬁber detector. This comparison
is meant to stress the importance of accounting for the cellular construct under study.
For the sake of completeness, light transmission through the BMF printed material as a function of the
distance d traveled by the rays inside an inﬁnitely long full cylinder is shown in Figure 6f, for which ex-
perimental values of κ were used as input parameters for the material. It can be observed that, for a
travel distance d = hcyl (vertical grey line), the transmission is T > 90%, showing that for the designed
device absorption in material should not limit the performances in light delivery.
Figure 6g shows an SEM micrograph of the corresponding 3D printed device. As can be observed in the
SEM image, the device has signiﬁcant roughness due to the resolution of the 3D printing process, sug-
gesting that light delivery toward to the center of the hollow cylinder could be further enhanced during
actual experiments on photostimulation.
14


3.3
Photostimulation of optogenetically modiﬁed cells
Figure 7: Optogenetics test with the BMF waveguide. a Lateral view of the OpM aligned with the pyrolytic carbon ﬁber.
b Top view of the 3D printed BMF waveguide. c Amperograms obtained at 0.2 mV analyzing of hVM1 cell cultured on
top of the pyrolytic ﬁber. In green— chemical stimulation via K+; in blue— optogenetics using LED 470 nm.
3.3
Photostimulation of optogenetically modiﬁed cells
To evaluate the functionality of the 3D-printed optogenetic system described in Section 2.2, we performed
photostimulation of optogenetically modiﬁed neural stem cells (hVM1-Bcl-XL-LChR2-mCherry), com-
bined with amperometric real-time detection of the released dopamine, which based on previous char-
acterization is the main released neurotransmitter [43, 44, 26]. The 3D printed waveguide was secured
within the custom-fabricated PMMA holder, with a 2 mL liquid reservoir and positioned above the light
source (Figure 7a). A pyrolytic carbon ﬁber, coated with optogenetically modiﬁed cells diﬀerentiated
for 10 days, was inserted into the central cavity of the optimized 3D-printed waveguide (Figure 7b) [43,
44, 26]. Following approximately a 90 s of amperometric baseline recording, photostimulation was per-
formed using a 470 nm LED mounted on the optogenetic motherboard, delivering a 500 ms light pulse
into the lumen of the 3D printed waveguide. The corresponding current response after optogenetic stim-
ulation (Figure 7c, blue trace), with a magniﬁed view provided in the inset. The time corresponding to
the maximal current response is indicated by the grey vertical line. To further assess the viability and
functionality of the optogenetically modiﬁed cells, dopamine exocytosis was induced via chemical de-
polarization by elevating the K+ concentration of the diﬀerentiation medium, in which the 3D printed
waveguide and diﬀerentiated cells were immersed, to the ﬁnal concentration of ∼150 mM. The corre-
sponding current response after chemical stimulation (Figure 7c, green trace) conﬁrms successful real-
time detection of dopamine release, validating both the functionality of the optogenetic cells and the
eﬃciency of the acquisition system. A comparative analysis of the electrical responses elicited by light-
induced (blue trace) and chemically induced (green trace) stimulation revealed a marked diﬀerence in
signal magnitude. While the recorded current amplitude upon chemical stimulation (Ichem) reached on
average about 20 nA, the photostimulation generated a signiﬁcantly lower current amplitude (Iphoto) of
about 600 pA, suggesting suboptimal light delivery by the 3D printed waveguide. The resulting stim-
ulation eﬃciency (Iphoto/ Ichem) was only about 2.8%. The experimental result is in line with the FEM
simulation presented in Figure 6f (ﬁber detector), for which a detected intensity smaller than the thresh-
old (dashed grey horizontal line) was predicted. Other factors may also contribute to this reduced stim-
15


ulation eﬃcacy. For instance, the culture medium and the 3D microenvironment may introduce optical
impedance, further limiting light penetration to the cells. Based on these ﬁndings, a further iteration of
the 3D waveguide design redesign will be necessary to optimize light delivery and improve the ﬁnal stim-
ulation eﬃciency.
4
Conclusion
In this study, we have demonstrated the feasibility of fabricating a complex 3D-printed waveguide for
optogenetic applications using a projection micro stereolithography (PµSL) printing. The 3D printed
waveguide is based on BMF resin, was optimized through geometric reﬁnements and an extensive opti-
cal characterization of the resin to enhance light transmission while minimizing losses. In addition, we
thoroughly characterized the light source used in this study as its properties signiﬁcantly inﬂuence light
propagation and, ultimately, opsin protein activation.
The primary objective of this work was to investigate the optical properties of BMF resin and assess
its potential applicability in optogenetics. Our ﬁndings provide proof of concept, demonstrating that
the 3D-printed BMF waveguide can transmit a suﬃcient light intensity for optostimulation, resulting in
measurable current response during electrochemical real-time detection of the released dopamine. The
optogenetic stimulation systems presented in this work is not a fully developed tool for optogenetic ap-
plications, but it rather represents an initial investigation into the potential of 3D printed structures for
such application. Future work will reduce optical losses by using photobleachable initiator systems and
low-absorption ﬂuorinated or cycloaliphatic matrices, further optimizing 3D waveguide geometry, such
as vertical alignment oﬀset between successive rows of holes, and minimizing the waveguide–cultured-cell
separation, thereby enhancing light transmission and stimulation eﬃciency
Ultimately, these advancements will be essential for the future integration of 3D-printed waveguide into
complex three-dimensional optogenetic organoid models, supporting further research into disease mecha-
nisms and potential therapeutic strategies.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author.
Acknowledgements
We thank the HORIZON-EIC-2021-PATHFINDEROPEN program and the projects 4-DBR (Project
101047099) and OpenMIND (Project 101047177), for providing the essential infrastructure and support
that made this research possible. The authors acknowledge PolyFabLab, a research infrastructure ﬁnan-
cially supported by the Novo Nordisk Foundation, grant number NNF21OC0068814.
References
[1] W. Chen, C. Li, W. Liang, Y. Li, Z. Zou, Y. Xie, Y. Liao, L. Yu, Q. Lin, M. Huang, Z. Li, X. Zhu,
Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 2022, 14.
[2] S. Leemann, F. Schneider-Warme, S. Kleinlogel, Pﬂ¨ugers Archiv-European Journal of Physiology
2023, 475, 12 1421.
[3] H. Tsukamoto, Y. Furutani, Optogenetics: Light-Sensing Proteins and Their Applications in Neuro-
science and Beyond 2021, 73–88.
[4] R. R. Parrish, C. MacKenzie-Gray-Scott, T. Jackson-Taylor, J. Voipio, A. Trevelyan, Physiology
2023, 38, S1 5730420.
[5] Q. Zhang, T. Li, M. Xu, B. Islam, J. Wang, Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology 2024, 44, 1 57.
[6] T. Abaya, S. Blair, P. Tathireddy, L. Rieth, F. Solzbacher, Biomedical optics express 2012, 3, 12
3087.
16


REFERENCES
[7] G. Yona, N. Meitav, I. Kahn, S. Shoham, eneuro 2016, 3, 1.
[8] D. R. Sparta, A. M. Stamatakis, J. L. Phillips, N. Hovelsø, R. Van Zessen, G. D. Stuber, Nature
protocols 2012, 7, 1 12.
[9] J.-W. Jeong, J. G. McCall, G. Shin, Y. Zhang, R. Al-Hasani, M. Kim, S. Li, J. Y. Sim, K.-I. Jang,
Y. Shi, et al., Cell 2015, 162, 3 662.
[10] P. Silva, L. Jacinto, Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering 2025, 18, 1 1.
[11] H. Ajieren, A. Fox, E. Biggs, G. Albors, A. Llebaria, P. Irazoqui, Biomedical engineering letters
2024, 14, 2 245.
[12] H. Zhang, Y. Peng, N. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Wang, H. Ding, Micromachines 2022, 13, 7 1069.
[13] M. Pisanello, F. Pisano, L. Sileo, E. Maglie, E. Bellistri, B. Spagnolo, G. Mandelbaum, B. L. Saba-
tini, M. De Vittorio, F. Pisanello, Scientiﬁc reports 2018, 8, 1 4467.
[14] S. Mondello, B. Pedigo, M. Sunshine, A. Fischedick, P. Horner, C. Moritz, Experimental neurology
2021, 335 113480.
[15] M. Farnham, P. Pilowsky, W. Deng, E. Goldys,
Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol.
2014.
[16] L. Rudmann, D. Scholz, M. T. Alt, A. Dieter, E. Fiedler, T. Moser, T. Stieglitz, Advanced Health-
care Materials 2024, 13, 16 2304513.
[17] J. W. Reddy, V. Jain, N. Guessaymi, M. H. Malekoshoaraie, M. Chamanzar, In Optogenetics and
Optical Manipulation 2023, volume 12366. SPIE, 2023 26–32.
[18] J. A. Frank, Current Opinion in Pharmacology 2022, 63 102195.
[19] Z. Chen, X. Li, Y. Tang, Z. Huang, J. Huang, H. Liu, Y. Weng, Y. Zhu, J. Zhao, R. Tang, et al.,
Cell Reports Physical Science 2024, 5, 10.
[20] G. H. Major, S. C. Chapman, J. T. Chapman, J. I. Wheeler, S. Chatterjee, C. V. Cushman, D. H.
Ess, M. R. Linford, Surface and Interface Analysis 2021, 53, 1 5.
[21] S. Ashraf, I. Niskanen, B. Kanyathare, E. Vartiainen, C. Mattsson, R. Heikkil¨a, G. Thungstr¨om,
Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer 2019, 224 309.
[22] Y. Zhu, T. Tang, S. Zhao, D. Joralmon, Z. Poit, B. Ahire, S. Keshav, A. R. Raje, J. Blair,
Z. Zhang, et al., Additive Manufacturing 2022, 52 102682.
[23] B. Monney, C. Kilchoer, C. Weder, ACS Polymers Au 2021, 2, 1 50.
[24] J. Feng, Y. Zheng, S. Bhusari, M. Villiou, S. Pearson, A. del Campo, Advanced functional materials
2020, 30, 45 2004327.
[25] A. Mohanty, Q. Li, M. A. Tadayon, G. Bhatt, E. Shim, X. Ji, J. Cardenas, S. A. Miller, A. Kepecs,
M. Lipson, arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11663 2018.
[26] S. Vasudevan, J. Kajtez, A.-I. Bunea, A. Gonzalez-Ramos, T. Ramos-Moreno, A. Heiskanen,
M. Kokaia, N. B. Larsen, A. Mart´ınez-Serrano, S. S. Keller, et al., Advanced Science 2019, 6, 24
1902011.
[27] H. Fujiwara, Spectroscopic ellipsometry: principles and applications, John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
[28] H. G. Tompkins, E. A. Irene, In Handbook of ellipsometry. William Andrew, 2005.
[29] M. Corato-Zanarella, X. Ji, A. Mohanty, M. Lipson, Optics Express 2024, 32, 4 5718.
17


REFERENCES
[30] T. C. Paul, J. Podder, Applied Physics A 2019, 125, 12 818.
[31] S. F. Bdewi, O. G. Abdullah, B. K. Aziz, A. A. Mutar, Journal of Inorganic and Organometallic
Polymers and Materials 2016, 26 326.
[32] H. A. Macleod, H. A. Macleod, Thin-ﬁlm optical ﬁlters, CRC press, 2010.
[33] T. Kashiwao, K. Ikeda, M. Tsumori, K. Bando, IEEJ Transactions on Electrical and Electronic En-
gineering 2025.
[34] S. Vasudevan, A. Dotti, J. Kajtez, A. Mart´ınez-Serrano, C. Gundlach, S. C. Ma¸c˜as, K. Lauschke,
A. M. Vinngaard, S. G. L´opez, M. Pereira, A. Heiskanen, S. S. Keller, J. Emn´eus, Bioelectrochem-
istry 2023, 149.
[35] G. A. Reider, Photonics, Springer, 2016.
[36] M. Reynoso, I. Gauli, P. Measor, Optical Materials Express 2021, 11, 10 3392.
[37] T. Gissibl, S. Wagner, J. Sykora, M. Schmid, H. Giessen, Optical Materials Express 2017, 7, 7 2293.
[38] K. Deisseroth, Nature Methods 2011, 8 26.
[39] Thorlabs,
Led470l,
Technical report, Thorlabs, 2024,
URL
https://www.thorlabs.com/drawings/aa357ad5a7fa16bf-DEBD8A03-02F7-12E2-D90399FB89857F5B/LED
Accessed: 2025-03-14.
[40] Thorlabs,
Led590l,
Technical report, Thorlabs, 2024,
URL
https://www.thorlabs.com/drawings/aa357ad5a7fa16bf-DEBD8A03-02F7-12E2-D90399FB89857F5B/LED
Accessed: 2025-03-14.
[41] J. Mattis, K. M. Tye, E. A. Ferenczi, C. Ramakrishnan, D. J. O’shea, R. Prakash, L. A. Gunaydin,
M. Hyun, L. E. Fenno, V. Gradinaru, et al., Nature methods 2012, 9, 2 159.
[42] A. Sauret, K. Somszor, E. Villermaux, E. Dressaire, In Physical Review Fluids, volume 3. American
Physical Society, ISSN 2469990X, 2018 .
[43] C. Krabbe, E. Courtois, P. Jensen, J. R. Jørgensen, J. Zimmer, A. Mart´ınez-Serrano, M. Meyer,
Journal of Neurochemistry 2009, 110, 6 1908.
[44] E. T. Courtois, C. G. Castillo, E. G. Seiz, M. Ramos, C. Bueno, I. Liste, A. Mart´ınez-Serrano, Jour-
nal of Biological Chemistry 2010, 285, 13 9881.
18


REFERENCES
Table of Contents
This article presents the design, optical characterization, and experimental validation of a 3D-printed waveguide for op-
togenetic stimulation. It details material optical properties, FEM-based design optimization, fabrication of a cylindri-
cal light-delivery system, and functional testing using ChR2-modiﬁed dopaminergic cells, demonstrating light-induced
dopamine release and outlining future improvements for enhanced stimulation eﬃciency.
19


Supporting Information: 3D printed waveguides for optogenetics
applications: design optimization and optical characterization
Giorgio Scordo* Kostas Kanellopulos Surangrat Thongkorn Samuel Tavares da Silva Maraschin Kambiz Ghasem-
inasab Evgeniy Shkondin Deepshika Arasu Stephan Sylvest Keller Arto Rainer Heiskanen Marta Perez Pereira
Jenny Emn´eus*
Dr. G. Scordo
Electronic Engineering Department, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via del Politecnico 1, 00133 Rome, Italy
Email Address: giorgio.scordo@uniroma2.it
Dr. K. Kanellopulos
TU Wien, Institute of Sensor and Actuator Systems, Gusshausstrasse 27-29, 1040 Vienna, Austria
Dr. S. Thongkorn
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800, Den-
mark
S. T. D. S. Maraschin
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800, Den-
mark
K. Ghaseminasab
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800, Den-
mark
Dr. E. Shkondin
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800, Den-
mark
D. Arasu
Hospital Cl´ınic de Barcelona - Fundaci´o de Recerca Clin´ıc Barcelona - IDIBAPS - University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
Prof. S.S. Keller
National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization (DTU Nanolab), Technical University of Denmark,
Ørsteds Plads Building 347, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800 Denmark
Dr. A. R. Heiskanen
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800, Den-
mark
Prof. M. P. Pereira
The Institute for Molecular Biology of the Autonomous University of Madrid, Madrid, 20049, Spain
Prof. J. Emn´eus
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, 2800, Den-
mark Email Address: jemn@dtu.dk
1


CONTENTS
Contents
S1 FEM Ray Tracing
3
S2 BMF optical characterization
6
S2.1 Ellipsometry measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
S2.2 Data compilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
S3 Optical motherboard
8
S3.1 Schematic circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
S3.2 Arduino script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
S3.3 Light cavities on Si wafer and 3D printing parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
S4 2D electromechanical sensor fabrication
10
2


S1
FEM Ray Tracing
The FEM simulations presented in the main text were based on a Ray Tracing (RT) study, conducted using the
Geometrical Optics (GO) module available in COMSOL Multiphysics. The physical parameters used in the
simulations—such as geometry and material parameters—are described in the main text. Here, we provide ad-
ditional computational details and illustrate the typical ray trajectories obtained from the simulations.
In the GO module, the light source was deﬁned through the Release from Boundary condition at the bottom sur-
face of the probe (see main text), with a input power P0. Each simulation released N = 2000 rays per event, with
conical emission with angle θ = 7° to match the characteristics of the experimental LED470. For each wave vec-
tor emitted, Nw = 10 rays were launched, resulting in a total of N · Nw = 2 · 104 rays per simulation. Each ray
carried an input power of Pr,0 = P0/(N ·Nw).
The cylindrical detector was modeled as a Boundary Wall set to fully absorb the impinging scattered light rays.
For each RT study, light propagation was simulated for a sufﬁciently long time t to reach steady-state conditions,
meaning all rays were either absorbed by the detector or had scattered into free space. An example of this tran-
sient behavior is shown in Fig. S1a, where the total detected intensity Idet increases over time, eventually reach-
ing a plateau. The observed staircase proﬁle corresponds to discrete rays arrival at the detector, each contributing
to the total signal at different times. The total detected intensity shown in Fig. S1a, and discussed in the main
Figure S1: a. Temporal evolution of Idet(t). b. 3D distribution of the scattered rays impinging onto the detector. The scalebar on the
right indicates the corresponding power density Qabs(r,t = t0), in units [W/m2], at time t = t0.
text, is obtained upon integration of the absorbed power density Qabs over the detector area Adet, and normalized
by the same quantity,
Idet(t) =
1
Adet
ZZ
Adet
Qabs(r,t)dAdet = Pdet(t)
Adet
.
(S1)
All values reported in the main text refer to the steady-state value Idet(t ≫0). Fig. S1b shows the 3D power den-
sity distribution Qabs(r,t = t0) across the detector area at a representative time t0.
Fig. S2 provides a snapshot of the ray trajectories throughout the simulation domain at the same time t = t0, with
the ray color indicating the delivered optical power. In this example, the source power was set to P0 = 1 W, lead-
ing to a maximum power per ray of Pr,max ≃P0/(N ·Nw) = 50 µW (red rays). The black lines denote the geome-
try of the probe.
3


Figure S2: Ray trajectories and corresponding carried optical power Pr,sca for nrow = ncol = 4, input wavelength λ = 470 nm, input
power P0 = 1 W, and incident angle θ = 7°.
As shown, the scattered rays form a complex pattern. Rays in the lower region (z < 0) that propagate downward
(kz < 0) result primarily from backscattering by the ﬁrst row of holes, and do not contribute to Idet. Among the
forward-propagating rays (kz > 0), some pass directly through the structure (for this speciﬁc case, the majority)
and are lost into free space, while others interact with the wall of the probe. The outward-propagating rays do
not contribute to Idet and are similarly lost into free space, whereas only inward-scattered rays—those directed
toward the detector—contribute to the ﬁnal Idet.
In particular, the outward-propagating rays are scattered with zenith angles θz ≤90°, with the ﬁrst row of holes
being the stronger scatterer region. Rays scattered by this ﬁrst row typically carry power Pr,sca > 45 µW each,
while those scattered from higher rows deliver reduced power (Pr,sca ∼20 µW) at smaller zenith angles (θz <
90°).
The inward-scattered rays contributing to Idet, shown in Fig. S3, are mostly scattered at zenith angles θz ≪90°.
This directional bias explains the observed reduction in Idet as the probe cylinder radius rcyl increases (Fig. 6e in
the main text): rays scattered at lower θz intesect the central axis at greater heights (z = rcyl tan(θz), increasing
the likehood of escaping the probe before reaching the detector. This effect is discussed in further details in the
main text.
4


Figure S3: Ray trajectories and corresponding carried optical power Pr,sca for nrow = ncol = 4, input wavelength λ = 470 nm, input
power P0 = 1 W, and incident angle θ = 7°.
5


S2
BMF optical characterization
S2.1
Ellipsometry measurements
Ellipsometry provides a non-destructive means of extracting the complex dielectric permittivity ⟨ε⟩of a material
by analyzing the change in polarization of reﬂected light. Assuming a single interface (air/material) and a known
angle of incidence φ, the permittivity can be calculated as follows [1]:
⟨ε⟩= sin2(φ)
"
1+tan2(φ)
1−ρ
1+ρ
2#
,
(S2)
where ρ is the ratio of the Fresnel reﬂection coefﬁcients for p- and s-polarized light:
ρ ≡rp
rs
= tan(Ψ)ei∆,
(S3)
with Ψ and ∆representing the amplitude ratio and phase difference, respectively, obtained from the ellipsomet-
ric measurement.
The complex permittivity is expressed as ⟨ε⟩= ε1 −iε2, from which the refractive index n and the extinction
coefﬁcient κ can be extracted using:
n =

ε1 +
q
ε2
1 +ε2
2
2


1/2
,
(S4)
κ =

−ε1 +
q
ε2
1 +ε2
2
2


1/2
.
(S5)
Figure S4: Spectrophotometer samples. Left: 3D printed BMF cuvette 1x1x5 cm. Right: a standard transparent cuvette.
6


S2.2
Data compilation
S2.2
Data compilation
The values of refractive index and extinction coefﬁcients used in Fig. 4 in the main text for various commonly
used material for optogenetics applications are listed in Table S1.
Table S1: List of the refractive index n and extinction coefﬁcient κ for λ = 470,590 nm.
Material
λ (nm)
n
κ
Ref.
SiN
470
2.05
2.5·10−6
[2]
590
2.023
3.57·10−7
[2]
Si
470
4.485
7.02·10−2
[3]
590
3.954
2·10−2
[3]
SiO2
470
1.477
1.5·10−5
[4]
590
1.471
3.73·10−6
[4]
SiC
470
3.47
0.51
[5]
590
3.41
0.32
[5]
SU8
470
1.6
3.74·10−6
[6]
590
1.59
3.03·10−6
[6]
PAG
470
1.5
1.72·10−6
[7]
590
1.5
1.08·10−6
[7]
PEGDA
470
1.45
4.49·10−8
[8]
590
1.45
5.63·10−9
[8]
PDMS
470
1.41
1.43·10−6
[9]
590
1.40
1.54·10−6
[9]
FormLabs Clear
470
1.518
0.2·10−6
n [10], κ [11]
590
1.509
0.14·10−6
n [10], κ [11]
OrmoComp
470
1.53
0.19·10−6
n [12], κ [13]
590
1.52
9.4·10−8
n [12], κ [13]
7


S3
Optical motherboard
S3.1
Schematic circuit
The designed Optical Motherboard comprises electrical transmission lines embedded in a matrix board (RS Com-
ponents, UK), as shown in Fig. S6b, where LED470 or LED590 are mounted—a schematics of the LED circuit is
shown in Fig. S5. A microcontroller board, Arduino Uno (Italy) regulates the current and controls pulse stimula-
tion via a dedicated script (section S3.2). The OpM is enclosed within a 3D-printed shell fabricated from black
tough resin using a Form 3 printer (Formlabs, USA). Neodymium magnets from RS Components, UK, are em-
bedded along the edges to facilitate the attachment of interchangeable lids, enabling a modular conﬁguration.
Figure S5: The schematic diagram of the equivalent circuit used for driving the LED
Figure S6: a Full assembled opto-motherboard device (OpM). b Top view of the OpM LED side.
8


S3.2
Arduino script
S3.2
Arduino script
The script used to activate the LED implements a loop in which the LED is turned on for six cycles of 500 ms,
followed by an off period of 50 s.
1 /*
2
Blinking
LED
3
4
model , check the
Technical
Specs of your
board at:
5
https :// www.arduino.cc/en/Main/Products
6
https :// www.arduino.cc/en/Tutorial/ BuiltInExamples /Blink
7 */
8
9 // the setup
function
runs once when you press
reset or power the board
10 void
setup () {
11
// initialize
digital pin 9 as an output.
12
pinMode (9, OUTPUT);
13
digitalWrite (9, LOW);
14
delay (60000);
15 }
16
17 // the loop
function
runs over and over
again
forever
18 void loop () {
19
digitalWrite (9, HIGH);
// turn the LED on (HIGH is the
voltage
level)
20
delay (500);
21
digitalWrite (9, LOW);
// turn the LED off
22
delay (50000);
23
24
digitalWrite (9, HIGH);
// on
25
delay (500);
26
digitalWrite (9, LOW);
// off
27
delay (50000);
28
29
digitalWrite (9, HIGH);
30
delay (500);
31
digitalWrite (9, LOW);
32
delay (50000);
33
34
digitalWrite (9, HIGH);
35
delay (500);
36
digitalWrite (9, LOW);
37
delay (50000);
38 }
Listing 1: Arduino sketch for 4-DBR blinking LED
S3.3
Light cavities on Si wafer and 3D printing parameters
To obtain two identical openings for positioning the 3D-printed probe on top of the light source, two symmetri-
cal semicircular apertures were ﬁrst designed using CAD software Layout Editor (Fig. S7a). The silicon chips
containing gold electrodes were then processed using a laser micromachining system (3D-Micromac AG, Ger-
many) operated at a power density of 7 mW/mm, a scanning speed of 250 µm/s, and 5000 repetitions. This pro-
cedure produced precise apertures on both sides of the electrode (Fig. S7b). Subsequently, the chips were cleaned
with ethanol to remove residual dust and debris.
To fabricate the 3D optical waveguide on the Si cavity, the ChituBox software (Chitu Systems, China) was em-
ployed for print preparation, using a layer thickness of 5 µm and fabricated using a Boston Micro Fabrication
(BMF) projection microstereolithography (PµSL) 3D printer. The printing procedure was divided into three se-
quential exposure stages to ensure proper adhesion, structural stability, and complete polymerization of the printed
microstructure. In the ﬁrst stage, a single base layer was exposed for 1 s at 40% light intensity (corresponding to
an effective optical power of 37.6 mW/cm2). This layer served to promote strong adhesion of the photocurable
resin to the silicon chip surface and establish a uniform foundation for subsequent layers. In the second stage,
9


the following 49 layers were cured under a 1 s exposure at 30% light intensity ( 28.2 mW/cm2 ) with a 2 s inter-
layer delay. This step allowed gradual structure buildup while minimizing internal mechanical stress and avoid-
ing over-curing, which can cause deformation in high-aspect-ratio geometries. In the ﬁnal stage, the remaining
261 layers were polymerized under a 1 s exposure at 45% ( 42.3 mW/cm2 )intensity with a 60 s interlayer delay.
The resulting microstructure exhibited uniform layer stacking and smooth interfaces, conﬁrming the precision
and stability of the PµSL printing process under these optimized exposure conditions (Fig. S7c).
Figure S7: Fabrication process of the optical cavity: a. CAD design consisting of multiple semicircular lines used as the laser path. b.
Top view of the fabricated optical cavity obtained after 5000 repetitions. c. Isometric view of the 3D-printed optical waveguide aligned
on top of the cavity.
S4
2D electromechanical sensor fabrication
Below is the detailed cleanroom step-by-step protocol used for device preparation.
1. Base Wafer Preparation
• 1.1 Stock-out – 150 mm Si <100>, 675 µm thick, single-side polished, n-type (P).
2. Nanograss Template on Si
• 2.1 ICP Etch (Pegasus 2) – Run “CORE” recipe to generate nanograss texture ([14]).
• 2.2 RCA Clean – Sequential RCA-I and RCA-II.
• 2.3 Wet Oxidation – Anneal+Oxide furnace (C1), WET at 1100 °C for 80 min (full boat), targeting 600 nm
SiO2 thickness.
3. Spin-Coating SU-8 2035 (˜15 µm)
• 3.1 Syringe Preparation – In fume hood, ﬁll syringes with SU-8 2035≥24 h before use; record bottle lot
and expiry.
• 3.2 Plasma Descum – Plasma Asher 2: 400 sccm O2, 70 sccm N2, 1 kW, 75 min.
• 3.3 Spin-Coating – RC08, program “BioMic 2035 15 µm (6-inch)”:
– 1000 rpm for 10 s (200 rpm/s) →5000 rpm for 120 s (1000 rpm/s), manual dispense.
• 3.4 Soft-Bake – Hot plate 1273: 50 °C for 15 min, with 2 °C/min ramps. Cool for 30 min.
10


• 3.5 Backside Wipe – Clean SU-8 from wafer backside using acetone and cleanroom tissue. Also wipe the
hot plate.
4. SU-8 Exposure and PEB
• 4.1 UV Exposure – MA6-2, soft contact, 2 × 250 mJ/cm2.
• 4.2 Post-Exposure Bake (PEB) – Hot plate 1273: 50 °C for 2 h with 2 °C/min ramps.
5. SU-8 Development, Hard-Bake, and Characterization
• 5.1 Development – PGMEA (NICOSTO), three 1-min puddles on Gamma spin-coater.
• 5.2 Flood Dose Test – MA6-2, 2 × 250 mJ/cm2, 30 s wait.
• 5.3 Hard-Bake – 90 °C for 15 h with 2 °C/min ramps.
• 5.4 Optical Inspection – Microscope inspection of dose-test features.
• 5.5 Thickness Measurement – Dektak/XTA; target: 15 µm. If deviation ¿15%, check resist age; note edge
bead thickening.
6. Pyrolysis of SU-8 to Glassy Carbon
• 6.1 Furnace Preparation – Run BioMic Prep N2 unless furnace was used <72 h ago.
– Load: wafers face-up, major ﬂat up, boat fully to rear; front side faces N2 ﬂow.
• 6.2 Pyrolysis – Use recipe nicostot3-step LowRamp 1050C 2h.
• 6.3 Post-Run Clean – Run BioMic CleanAfterUsed ActiveCooling.
• 6.4 Carbon Thickness – Dektak/XTA; aim for 2.2–2.3 µm (same ¿15% deviation rule as in 5.5).
• 6.5 Optical Check – Microscope inspection of dose-test patterns.
• 6.6 Sheet Resistance – 4-point probe on test structures.
• 6.7 SEM Cleanliness Check – Supra 2 (InLens/SE2); verify no dust or metal.
7. Metal-Contact Photolithography (AZ 5214E, 4.2 µm)
• 7.1 Spin-Coating – Gamma coater, program 6141-DCH, HMDS prime, 3 × 11.4 s coating, 20 s wait →
4.2 µm ﬁlm.
• 7.2 Pattern Exposure – MA6-2, contact mode, exposure time 20 s (design-dependent).
• 7.3 Reversal Bake – 110 °C for 180 s.
• 7.4 Flood Exposure – MA6-2, 20 × 49.5 mJ/cm2 (≈1 J/cm2), 4.5 s exposure, 20 s wait.
• 7.5 Development – TMAH (1007 DCH), 5 × 60 s steps; extend in 60 s increments until clear and uniform.
• 7.6 Final Inspection – Dektak + microscope; verify exposure quality, alignment, resist thickness, and cov-
erage.
11


REFERENCES
References
[1] H. Fujiwara, Spectroscopic ellipsometry: principles and applications, John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
[2] M. Corato-Zanarella, X. Ji, A. Mohanty, M. Lipson, Optics Express 2024, 32, 4 5718.
[3] C. Schinke, P. Christian Peest, J. Schmidt, R. Brendel, K. Bothe, M. R. Vogt, I. Kr¨oger, S. Winter, A. Schir-
macher, S. Lim, H. T. Nguyen, D. MacDonald, AIP Advances 2015, 5, 6 067168.
[4] D. Franta, D. Neˇcas, I. Ohl´ıdal, A. Giglia, In Optical Micro- and Nanometrology VI, volume 9890. SPIE,
ISBN 9781510601352, ISSN 1996756X, 2016 989014.
[5] J. I. Larruquert, A. P. P´erez-Mar´ın, S. Garc´ıa-Cort´es, L. R. de Marcos, J. A. Azn´arez, J. A. M´endez, J. Opt.
Soc. Am. A 2011, 28, 11 2340.
[6] Z. Chen, X. Li, Y. Tang, Z. Huang, J. Huang, H. Liu, Y. Weng, Y. Zhu, J. Zhao, R. Tang, et al., Cell Reports
Physical Science 2024, 5, 10.
[7] B. Monney, C. Kilchoer, C. Weder, ACS Polymers Au 2021, 2, 1 50.
[8] J. Feng, Y. Zheng, S. Bhusari, M. Villiou, S. Pearson, A. del Campo, Advanced functional materials 2020,
30, 45 2004327.
[9] X. Zhang, J. Qiu, X. Li, J. Zhao, L. Liu, Appl. Opt. 2020, 59, 8 2337.
[10] M. Reynoso, I. Gauli, P. Measor, Optical Materials Express 2021, 11, 10 3392.
[11] D. Bartels, M. Heise, M. Schmidt, Optics 2024, 5, 4 611.
[12] T. Gissibl, S. Wagner, J. Sykora, M. Schmid, H. Giessen, Optical Materials Express 2017, 7, 7 2293.
[13] N. Jost, A. Jacobo-Mart´ın, G. Vallerotto, J. J. Hern´andez, A. Garcia-Sanchez, C. Dom´ınguez, I. Rodr´ıguez,
I. Ant´on, The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 2024, 131, 12 5961.
[14] V. Thi Hoang Nguyen, C. Silvestre, P. Shi, R. Cork, F. Jensen, J. Hubner, K. Ma, P. Leussink, M. de Boer,
H. Jansen, ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technology 2020, 9, 2 024002.
12
