Assessing Power Flow Controllability via Variable
Line Reactance
Eric Haag, Yuhao Chen, Giri Venkataramanan, and Manish K. Singh
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin–Madison
Emails: {erhaag, yuhao.chen,}@wisc.edu, giri@engr.wisc.edu, manish.singh@wisc.edu
Abstract—The rapid growth of large data center loads and
inverter-based generation is increasing the stress on transmission
networks, while expanding grid capacity at the required pace
remains challenging. Power flow controllers (PFCs) that adjust
effective line reactances to redistribute flows are often viewed as
an interim solution to improve transmission network utilization.
Traditional flexibility metrics and analysis approaches for PFCs
focus on a limited number of operating points and contingencies.
Towards gaining system-wide insights, this paper introduces a
framework to quantify network flow controllability—the extent to
which line flows can be reshaped through reactance adjustments.
We derive analytical results demonstrating that installing PFCs
on all lines enables complete controllability of feasible flow
patterns. Building on these, we conduct empirical studies on the
IEEE 39-bus system to examine how controllability varies with
the number of PFCs and their reactance adjustment range. These
analyses employ a mixed-integer linear program to optimize the
siting and sizing of PFCs. Finally, we validate findings under
AC power flow physics using an optimization routine that steers
flows toward desired setpoints.
Index Terms—DC power flow, grid-enhancing technologies, line
reactance control, network flow, power flow control.
I. INTRODUCTION
The recent upsurge in large data center loads and continued
increase in inverter-based resource (IBR)-connected generation
have directed societal attention to the stress power grids
and their operators are experiencing. While the need for
increased power transmission capabilities is widely acknowl-
edged, achieving the pace required to keep up with load growth
is prohibitively challenging. Grid-enhancing technologies are
gaining attention as quickly deployable interim solutions that
maximize the utilization of existing transmission infrastruc-
ture [1], [2]. Broadly speaking, while system operators regulate
bus power injections across a network, the line flows are
determined by power flow (PF) physics. Therefore, it is
frequently observed that the maximum power transfer from
a source to a sink is limited by a single (or a few) lines being
at their limits. Significant available power-transfer capacity on
numerous power lines is rendered unusable in such cases.
Flexible Alternating Current Transmission System (FACTS)
technologies enabling control of line power flows have long
been studied and developed. However, the costs and capabil-
ities of available solutions have not been compelling enough
This work was partially supported by the U.S. NSF under grant 2453151.
Support from members of the Wisconsin Electric Machines and Power
Electronics Consortium at the University of Wisconsin-Madison is gratefully
acknowledged.
for large-scale deployments, particularly to enable network-
wide flow control. With the increase in stress on transmis-
sion infrastructure, there is a renewed interest in PF control
technologies. Abstracting away implementation details, PF
controllers (PFCs) on AC lines operate by varying the effective
line reactance or by introducing a phase shift [3]. FACTS
devices and phase-shifting transformers allow these variations,
to some extent. Among these, power electronic devices that
control line reactances offer the least complex approach to
realize PFC, particularly in light of recent and emerging
advances in power semiconductor devices with ac switching
capability, converter topological features and versatility in
control [4]–[9].
While the operation of an individual PFC is reasonably
understood, system-level implications are often difficult to
characterize [10], [11]. The transmission capacity enhance-
ment benefits of PFCs are usually evaluated for specific
systems, use cases, and operating scenarios [12]. The cur-
rently used metrics, such as loadability margin or total
transfer capability, are valuable to for providing situational
insights under conceivable, actable uncertainty in potential
contingencies, operating conditions, and load-change direction
vectors [13], [14]. However, these metrics obscure the true
potential of PFCs and do not provide the systemic insights
needed when uncertainty in load growth and generation in-
stallations is too high for scenario-based studies. Deviating
from the conventional approaches, this work aims to directly
quantify the flow controllability offered by PFCs. We first
derive analytical insights on what flow configurations can be
achieved by varying line reactances within a DC PF model.
After obtaining strongly positive analytical results on flow
controllability enabled by installing PFCs on all lines, we
proceed to empirical investigations using the IEEE 39-bus
system in more practical settings. Continuing with the DC
PF model, we examine the interplay among the number of
PFCs installed in a network, the level of reactance control per
PFC, and the achievable range of line flow alterations. These
analyses were carried out using a mixed-integer linear program
formulated for siting and sizing of PFCs. Finally, we validate
our findings under AC PF physics using an optimal operation
routine that adjusts the line reactances to steer AC power
flows towards desired setpoints. Our analytical and empirical
findings provide comprehensive system-level insights and set
the stage for advanced analysis for optimal siting, sizing, and
operation of reactance control-based PFCs.
arXiv:2511.15685v1  [math.OC]  19 Nov 2025


Notation: Lower- (upper-) case boldface letters denote
column vectors (matrices). The inequalities are understood
element-wise. Vector en is the n-th canonical vector. Operators
| · | and ⊙represent set cardinality and entry-wise vector
products. Operator dg() yields a diagonal matrix by placing
its vector argument as the main diagonal.
II. ANALYTICAL INVESTIGATIONS
In this section, we use the classical DC PF model to provide
analytical insights into the controllability of power flows by
varying line reactances. The formal proof of the presented
results is deferred to an extended version of this manuscript
due to space limitations. The single-phase equivalent of a
connected power network with N buses can be represented
by a connected graph G = (N, E), whose nodes correspond
to buses, and edges e = (m, n) ∈E to transmission lines,
with cardinality |E| = E. We review some graph-theoretic
preliminaries next that will facilitate the ensuing analysis.
A. Graph-theoretic preliminaries
Given an undirected graph G = (N, E), one can assign
arbitrary edge directions to define the E × N edge-node
incidence matrix defined as
Ae,k :=





+1
, k = m
−1
, k = n
0
, otherwise
∀e = (m, n) ∈E.
(1)
Property 1: For a connected network, the incidence matrix
defined in (1) satisfies A1 = 0 and rank(A) = N −1.
A radial topology corresponds to networks with no cycles.
For such networks, E = N −1. Hence, the related matrix
A has full row rank per Property 1. In a meshed graph, a
sequence of adjacent edges that starts and ends at the same
node is called a cycle. The number of independent cycles
in a graph is given by C = E −N + 1. For a cycle C,
one can define an indicator vector nC ∈{0, ±1}E such that
nC
e = 0 if an edge e is not included in cycle C; nC
e = 1 if
edge e is directed along the cycle direction, and nC
e = −1,
otherwise. It holds that A⊤nC = 0, translating to the fact that
purely cyclic network flows do not involve nodal injections
or withdrawals. Let matrix N ∈RE×C be constructed by
stacking the indicator vectors for the C independent cycles of
a meshed network. It then holds that null(A⊤) = range(N).
B. DC PF model-based flow controllability results
Denote the bus active power injections by p ∈RN, and
line active power flows by f ∈RE. Given the vector of line
reactances, x ∈RE, the DC PF equations can be stated as
A⊤f = p,
(2a)
dg(x)f = Aθ,
(2b)
where θ is the N-length vector of bus voltage angles. Equa-
tion (2a) models the power balance at each bus, and Eq. (2b)
relates the voltage angle differences across a line to the power
flows. Given the voltage angle at a reference bus, and power
injections satisfying 1⊤p = 0, the DC power flow model
is known to admit a unique solution in (f, θ). However, the
above is often stated in the context of networks with fixed
line reactances xe > 0 for all edges e. Since we are deviating
from the conventional setting of fixed positive reactances, it is
worth re-examining the properties of the DC PF model (2). The
following result dictates the uniqueness of DC PF solutions
when the requirement xe > 0 is relaxed.
Proposition 1: Given network parameters (A, x), balanced
power injections p such that 1⊤p = 0, and a reference angle
θr for some r ∈N, a unique solution (f, θ) to (2) exists
if and only if one of the following conditions is satisfied:
P1.1. The power network is radial.
P1.2. For a meshed network, the matrix N⊤dg(x)N is
invertible.
We will next provide results related to the following central
question on power-flow controllability:
Q1) Given (p, f) satisfying (2a), does there always exist an
(x, θ) that satisfies (2b)?
Since the power injections appear only in (2a), the previous
question essentially investigates the solvability of (2b) written
differently as
dg(f)
−A
|
{z
}
E×(E+N)
x
θ

= 0.
(3)
From Property 1, we note that (x = 0, θ = α1) is a
trivial solution to (3) for any constant scalar α. Moreover,
given that (3) constitutes an under-determined system of linear
equations, the solution set coinciding with the nullspace of
dg(f)
−A
has a dimension of at least N. Therefore, the
answer to Q1) is trivially yes. Since transmission lines are
typically inductive, a significant level of compensation would
be needed to get to xe ≤0. Therefore, a pertinent follow-up
question is
Q2) Given line flows f, does there always exist an x > 0 and
a vector θ that satisfy (3)?
For radial power systems, the above question readily admits
a strong affirmative answer.
Proposition 2: For radial power systems, given any vector
f, and any x, ∃θ satisfying (3).
The above result follows from observing that E = N −1
for radial networks, resulting in linearly independent rows of
A, since rank(A) = N −1. Therefore, a solution for θ can
be obtained by solving Aθ = dg(f)x for any (f, x). One
can therefore pick x > 0 to align with the pursuit of Q2).
However, the positive answer for radial systems has limited
significance, as the notion of flow control is nuanced only for
meshed networks. The next result provides a necessary and
sufficient condition for answering Q2) with a positive.
Proposition 3: For meshed power systems, given any vector
f, a solution (x, θ) to (3) with x > 0 exists if and only if for
all n ∈null(A⊤) one of the following conditions hold:
P3.1. f ⊙n = 0
P3.2. ∃i, j such that e⊤
i (f ⊙n) > 0 and e⊤
j (f ⊙n) < 0
The above conditions are not limiting, as they merely state
that there cannot be cyclic flows in the network.


III. EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The analytical results in Section II establish a strong
promise of redistributing power flows on transmission lines by
varying the line reactances. While insightful, the findings raise
further questions, such as what level of line reactance control
is required to manipulate power flow patterns adequately, and
how effectively power flows can be controlled when account-
ing for the detailed AC power flow physics. To empirically
investigate these aspects, we first generated a dataset of desired
line flow scenarios for the IEEE 39-bus system. Next, we
formulated a DC PF-based formulation for siting and sizing
of reactance control capabilities for a subset of lines such that
the entire scenario set can be realized. Finally, we conducted
empirical studies aiming at realizing the same set of flow
scenarios via line reactance control under AC PF constraints.
A. Flow scenario set generation
We obtained the nominal (re)active power demands (pd
◦, qd
◦)
for the IEEE 39-bus system [15]. Using entry-wise scaling
pd
s = pd
◦⊙up
s and qd
s = qd
◦⊙uq
s, S demand scenarios were
generated. The entries of up
s and uq
s were each independently
drawn from uniform random distributions on the intervals
[0.2, 2] and [0.9, 1.1], respectively. To mimic a setup in which
approximate grid dispatch could be carried out by relaxing
the DC PF physics (2b) and merely respecting resource and
network-flow constraints (2a), we solve the following optimal
power flow problem for all S demand instances.
min
(pg
s)⊤Qpg
s
(P1)
s.to A⊤fs = pg
s −pd
s,
(4a)
pg ≤pg
s ≤¯pg,
(4b)
−¯f ≤fs ≤¯f,
(4c)
where the cost coefficients Q, generation limits (pg, ¯pg),
and line limits ¯f were obtained from the MATPOWER case
file [15]. After disregarding infeasible instances, we remove
scenarios that violate the conditions identified in Proposi-
tion 3 since these instances would not be realizable with
any positive value of line reactances. Thus obtained dataset
{pd
s, qd
s, pg
s, fs}S
s=1 will be used in the ensuing analysis with
a special focus on flows fs. The reasoning is that the flows
obtained from the above procedure are representative of desir-
able flow patterns on the grid. However, our analysis approach
will apply to an arbitrary set of desired flow configurations.
We next assessed how distinct the desired flow config-
urations {fs} are from the flows expected from DC PF.
Specifically, we solved (2) for all the scenarios using the
nominal line reactances, denoted as x◦, and setting the net
power injection p as pg
s −pd
s to obtain the DC PF solutions
{f ◦
s }S
s=1. We then sorted the scenarios in increasing order of
∥fs −f ◦
s ∥2
2, providing the intuition that, as one parses through
the dataset, they encounter flow configurations that become
increasingly difficult to realize by varying the line reactances.
B. DC PF based siting and sizing of reactance control
Let the maximum and minimum possible reactance values
for all lines be stacked in vectors ¯x and x, respectively. Let
d ∈{0, 1}E capture reactance controller placement such that
de = 1 indicates presence of some level of reactance control
while de = 0 implies no reactance control, i.e., x◦
e = ¯xe = xe.
The optimal siting and sizing task for reactance controllers to
ensure the realizability of flows {fs}S′
s=1 can be formulated as
min 1⊤(¯x −x)
(P2)
over {xs, θs}S′
s=1, d, x, ¯x
s.to dg(fs)xs = Aθs, ∀s
(5a)
x ≤xs ≤¯x, ∀s
(5b)
0 ≤¯x −x◦≤x◦⊙d,
(5c)
0 ≤x◦−x ≤x◦⊙d,
(5d)
1⊤d ≤K, d ∈{0, 1}E,
(5e)
where S′ ≤S is the number of scenarios considered, K
is the budget for the number of reactance controllers. The
upper bounds in (5c)–(5d) limit the reactance control range to
±100%, eliminating the possibility of negative line reactances.
Using (P2), we studied the interplay between the difficulty
of flow scenarios considered and the number and capacity of
reactance controllers needed. Since the dataset is sorted in
increasing order of difficulty surrogate ∥fs −f ◦
s ∥2
2, we solved
(P2) for S′ = 5, 50, 100, 2000, and 5000 scenarios. For each
S′, we first solved (P2) with K = 46, the total number of
lines in the IEEE 39-bus system, and recorded the optimal
total control capability requirement 1⊤(¯x −x) in per unit.
Then we re-solved (P2) for decreasing values of K until
the problem becomes infeasible. This analysis provides the
minimum number of controllers needed for each S′, denoted as
Kmin(S′), and the corresponding value of 1⊤(¯x−x). Figure 1
summarizes our findings for the above analysis.
Fig. 1.
The trendline shows the minimum number of lines with adjustable
reactance needed to realize S′ flow scenarios. The bar graphs provide total
reactance-adjustment capacity 1⊤(¯x −x) required when all 46 lines or just
Kmin lines have reactance control capability.
Aligning with expectations, Fig. 1 indicates that the mini-
mum number of reactance controllers required increases with


Fig. 2.
Distributions of negative (γe,down) and positive (γe,up) reactance-
adjustment capacity needed per line for different numbers of scenarios S′.
Despite allowing K = 46, several lines did not need reactance adjustment.
Those lines are omitted from this figure.
the number and difficulty of flow patterns to be realized.
Interestingly, all flow patterns could be realized with reactance
controllers placed on 30 out of 46 lines. Further analytical
investigation revealed that reactance controllers are never
needed on lines that are not in any cycles, referred to as bridges
in graph terminology; a result that follows from extension
of Proposition 2. The test system had 11 bridges. Thus, the
generated flow patterns were rich enough to require controllers
on 30 out of 35 non-bridge lines. When evaluating the total
reactance control capability across all lines, Fig. 1 shows the
expected increase with the increasing number of scenarios.
However, a potentially surprising observation was made when
comparing the total control capability required with K = 46
versus K = Kmin. Specifically, for any value of S′, the total
control capability 1⊤(¯x −x) does not increase significantly
when one decreases the allowable number of controllers.
Further analytical and empirical analysis is needed to uncover
the underlying reasons for this observation.
We next studied the optimally allocated reactance control
capability on individual lines for K = 46 and while varying
S′ using the relative reactance adjustment metrics
γe,down = xe −x◦
e
x◦e
,
γe,up = ¯xe −x◦
e
x◦e
.
The frequency distribution of the optimal adjustments is shown
in Fig. 2. For a line e, positive adjustments depict γe,up
values while γe,down corresponds to negative adjustments.
The expectation that increasing S′ would require a broader
range of control capabilities carries through for S′ up to
2000. However, another surprising observation is made for
S′ = 5000: the solution of (P2) almost abandons reactance-
increase capabilities, and rather attains flow controllability by
optimally reducing the reactance of individual lines over wider
ranges. Analyzing the shift in solution in the extreme case of
S′ = 5000 motivates further research.
C. AC PF based evaluation of power flow control capabilities
Our empirical tests under DC PF modeling strengthened the
analytical findings by demonstrating that desired flow patterns
can be realized on a power network by varying the reactances
for a subset of lines. Recall that the dataset of flow pattern was
generated by solving (P1), which is a relaxation of DC OPF,
that does not account for losses or reactive power demands and
flows. The flows themselves are therefore infeasible under AC
PF settings [16]. Nevertheless, in this section, we evaluate how
close the AC power flows can be brought to the flow scenarios
fs by varying line reactances. To contextualize the results we
solved DC and AC PF for the nominal loads, generation,
and network parameters in the test system and found that
the average of line flow discrepancies |f AC
e
−f DC
e
|/ ¯fe was
approximately 1.14%. So a mismatch in the AC power flows,
after adjusting the line reactances, and desired setpoints fs in
that numerical range shall be considered a perfect realization.
We abstractly represent the sending-end active power flow
vector using the AC power flow mapping as f AC
s
(x) =
ACPF(pd
s, qd
s, pg
s; x), where the power demands and gen-
erator active power setpoints are selected from our dataset,
and generator voltage setpoints are set to 1 p.u., and one
generator bus is set as the slack bus. With the nominal line
reactances, solving AC PF for all S scenarios yielded a flow
mismatch |f AC
s,e (x◦) −fs,e|/ ¯fe, averaged over E lines and S
scenarios, as 8.81%. We then investigated the extent to which
the mismatch can be reduced if the reactances for all 46 lines
could be controlled. Setting K = 46 in (P2) provides us,
among other things, the optimal reactance vector xDC
s
for each
scenario, where we have added the superscript to emphasize
that xDC
s
is deemed optimal under DC PF settings. We carried
out the ensuing analysis for 50 scenarios that were chosen to
represent a varying level of difficulty. The selected instances
correspond to s = 1, 101, . . . , 4901. Recall that, if one sets
the line reactances to xDC
s
, the power injections (pg
s −pd
s)
would result in the line flows being precisely equal to fs
under DC PF. Under AC PF, however, the average mismatch
|f AC
s,e (xDC
s
)−fs,e|/ ¯fe, while dropping from 8.81% at nominal
reactance, remains at 4.21%. The reduction in mismatch is
appreciable since the reactance adjustment was calculated by
(P2) without accounting for AC PF physics.
For evaluating the added improvement in power flow con-
trol by adjusting line reactances explicitly under AC PF
considerations, we solved the following optimization routine
independently for selected scenarios
min
x ∥f AC
s
(x) −fs∥2
2+w∥x −xDC
s
∥2
2
(P3)
s.to
f AC
s
(x) = ACPF(pd
s, qd
s, pg
s; x),
(6a)
x ≥0,
(6b)
where the weight w is used to balance the regularization term
that injects useful prior information xDC
s
available from solv-


ing (P2). Despite the nonconvexity of (P3), it can be efficiently
solved by developing gradient-based methods such as the ones
reported in [17]. Since numerical tractability was not our
emphasis, we solved (P3) for the selected 50 scenarios using
the nonlinear least-squares minimization function lsqnonlin
from MATLAB Optimization Toolbox. Since the function can
only handle linear constraints, we augmented the cost function
to model the AC PF bus power balance mismatches, thereby
relaxing (6a). The AC PF mismatch penalty term was weighted
such that the active and reactive power mismatch at all buses
was less than 10−5 p.u. Note that as w →∞, the minimizer
of (P3) denoted as x⋆
s(w) would become equal to xDC
s
. Small
values of w, on the other hand, allow aggressive changes in
line reactances to minimize the AC line power flow mismatch.
Fig. 3.
Average (over lines) mismatch between desired line flow values fs
and realized line flows under AC PF for varying values of line reactance.
Mismatches at nominal reactance, DC setpoint from (P2), and setpoints from
(P3) for varying w are plotted. Each trendline represents one scenario, while
the bold line provides the average over all 50 scenarios.
Figure 3 shows the percentage mismatch in line flows
averaged over the 46 lines and 50 scenarios, when the AC
power flow f AC
s
was computed for the nominal line reactance
x◦, reactance setpoint from (P2) xDC
s
, and the reactance values
obtained from (P3) for different values of w. We observed that
by reducing w, and hence allowing (P3) to deviate from the
reactances suggested by the DC setup, the average branch flow
mismatch could be lowered to 1.8%, which can be deemed as
a near-perfect match.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work has put forth a comprehensive analytical and
empirical investigation into the system-wide impact of varying
transmission line reactances towards power flow control. Un-
der simplified DC PF settings, it has been shown that arbitrary
flow patterns that do not constitute circulating power flows can
be realized on a power network if all line reactances are con-
trollable, even if restricted to be inductive. Empirical tests with
the DC PF model further reveal that a significant level of flow
controllability is achievable with controllers placed on fewer
lines. Graph-theoretic insights are obtained on determining
which lines would not benefit from flow controllers. Numerical
tests under AC PF settings corroborate the validity of our
analytical and empirical findings obtained using the simplified
DC PF model, and demonstrate the capability of obtaining
desired line flow patterns while accounting for detailed AC
power flow. This work lays down the algorithmic framework
for enabling future research on optimal siting, sizing, and
operation of power flow controllers while reporting several
observations that warrant further investigation.
REFERENCES
[1] U.S. Department of Energy, “Grid enhancing technologies: A case study
on ratepayer impact,” U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC,
Tech. Rep., 2022.
[2] M. S.-A. Omid Mirzapour, Xinyang Rui, “Grid-enhancing technologies:
Progress, challenges, and future research directions,” Electric Power
Systems Research, vol. 230, p. 110304, 2024.
[3] J. Gentle, S. M. S. Alam, M. Sun, Z. Priest, A. D. Rosso, D. Schweer,
and S. Guggilam, “Implementation and operation of power flow control
solutions for transmission systems,” Idaho National Laboratory and
EPRI, Technical Report INL/RPT-24-78148, 2024.
[4] Y. Guo, Y. Qin, M. Xiao, M. Porter, Q. Song, D. Popa, L. Efthymiou,
K. Cheng, I. Kravchenko, L. Shao, H. Wang, F. Udrea, and Y. Zhang,
“Enhancement-mode gan monolithic bidirectional switch with break-
down voltage over 3.3 kv,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 46, no. 4,
pp. 556–559, 2025.
[5] J. Liu, H. Kim, A. J. Young, Y. Jiao, E. Persson, Z. Xiao, B. Pandya,
T. M. Jahns, and M. Imam, “Gan bidirectional switches: Device technol-
ogy, applications, and future prospects,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron.,
pp. 1–14, 2025.
[6] R. P. Kandula, A. Iyer, R. Moghe, J. E. Hernandez, and D. Divan, “Power
router for meshed systems based on a fractionally rated back-to-back
converter,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron., vol. 29, pp. 5172–5180, 2014.
[7] J. C. Rosas-Caro, J. M. Ramirez, and F. Z. Peng, “Simple topologies for
ac-link flexible ac transmission systems,” in IEEE Bucharest PowerTech,
2009, pp. 1–8.
[8] F. Mancilla-David and G. Venkataramanan, “Modeling and control of the
static synchronous series compensator under different operating modes,”
in IEEE Power Electronics Specialists Conference, 2007, pp. 2443–2449.
[9] F. Mancilla-David, S. Bhattacharya, and G. Venkataramanan, “A com-
parative evaluation of series power-flow controllers using dc- and ac-link
converters,” IEEE Trans. Power Delivery, vol. 23, pp. 985–996, 2008.
[10] J. Zhao, T. Zheng, and E. Litvinov, “A unified framework for defining
and measuring flexibility in power system,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst.,
vol. 31, pp. 339–347, 2016.
[11] J. Li, F. Liu, Z. Li, C. Shao, and X. Liu, “Grid-side flexibility of power
systems in integrating large-scale renewable generations: A critical
review on concepts, formulations and solution approaches,” Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 93, pp. 272–284, 2018.
[12] X. Zhang, K. Tomsovic, and A. Dimitrovski, “Security constrained
multi-stage transmission expansion planning considering a continuously
variable series reactor,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 32, pp. 4442–
4450, 2017.
[13] Y. Ou and C. Singh, “Improvement of total transfer capability using
TCSC and SVC,” in Power Engineering Society Summer Meeting.
Conference Proceedings, vol. 2, 2001, pp. 944–948.
[14] ——, “Assessment of available transfer capability and margins,” IEEE
Trans. Power Syst., vol. 17, pp. 463–468, 2002.
[15] R. D. Zimmerman, C. E. Murillo-Sanchez, and R. J. Thomas, “MAT-
POWER: steady-state operations, planning and analysis tools for power
systems research and education,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 26, pp.
12–19, 2011.
[16] K. Baker, “Solutions of DC OPF are never AC feasible,” in Proc. ACM
International Conference on Future Energy Systems, ser. e-Energy ’21.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, p.
264–268.
[17] B. Taheri and D. K. Molzahn, “Ac-informed dc optimal transmission
switching problems via parameter optimization,” IEEE Trans. Power
Syst., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 5422–5433, 2025.
