Dynamic stabilisation of mesospin chains
Damjan Dagbjartsson1*, Simon Banks2 and Bj¨orgvin Hj¨orvarsson1
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 516, Uppsala, 751 20,
Sweden.
2Department of Chemistry, King’s College London, Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, United
Kingdom.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): dad8@hi.is;
Contributing authors: simon.banks@kcl.ac.uk; bjorgvin.hjorvarsson@physics.uu.se;
Abstract
We present a rare example of a one-dimensional system with short-range range interactions for which
a self-stabilizing long-range ordered phase persists to finite temperatures. Our model offers a new
perspective on the origins of shape anisotropy on the mesoscopic scale in magnetic metamaterials.
Specifically, we show how the combination of a physically realistic stray-field potential and the spatial
dimensionality of the system can reduce the effective dimensionality of classical magnetic mesospins.
The resulting emergent constraints on the magnetic excitation spectrum underpin the observed order-
ing, in stark contrast to the behaviour of analogous one-dimensional models with strictly isotropic
spins.
1
Introduction
It has been one hundred years since Ising’s semi-
nal work on his eponymous model of magnetism.
In the intervening period, related classical spin
models have been widely studied, for their inher-
ent interest as model magnets and as windows into
phenomena across a wide range of disciplines in
the natural sciences and beyond. More recently,
advances in the fabrication and characterization
of magnetic metamaterials have enabled the study
of physical manifestations of these classical spin
models with unprecedented levels of experimental
control over their three primary defining charac-
teristics: the dimensionality of the spin, the inter-
actions between spins and the dimensionality (or
the extension) of the lattice [1–4]. These magnetic
structures comprise arrays of mesoscopic spins
(‘mesospins’) – thin nanomagnets on the scale of
1−103 nm with a single domain magnetic configu-
ration over a wide temperature range, giving them
characteristics of artificial classical atomic spins
[5]. The thinness of the mesospins results in their
magnetic easy-axes being strongly biased in-plane
(a remark which, whilst generally now accepted
as true and requiring no further justification, goes
to the heart of the result in the current paper, as
discussed below). The mesospins can be shaped
lithographically, with circular discs behaving as
effective XY spin analogs, and elongated islands
exhibiting Ising-like behaviour [2].
Magnetic metamaterials thus facilitate the
study of phase transitions, emergence, and col-
lective dynamics with a degree of flexibility pre-
viously only available in numerical simulations.
They also give insight into the impact of finite-
size effects, and the significant variation in length
1


scales over which these are relevant in differ-
ent systems. However, whilst theoretical studies
allow for parameters such as spin dimensional-
ity, lattice extension/dimensionality and spin-spin
interactions to be varied and combined freely, in
magnetic metamaterials these parameters are sub-
ject to a complex interplay, with the significant
additional consideration of the internal magnetic
texture of the mesospins themselves. Of partic-
ular interest is the emergence of a self-induced
anisotropy in the interactions between mesospins.
This is seen to originate from a combination of
the extension of the mesospins and the symme-
try of the lattice defined by their arrangement[6].
Ostensibly two-dimensional square arrays have
been observed to behave as sets of decoupled one-
dimensional chains when suitably “dressed” by
a magnetic field along the [10] direction. This
behaviour hints at a new way to think of spin, and
indeed lattice, dimensionality – allowing these to
be seen as variable parameters in certain classes
of system, with values strongly influenced both by
each other and by their interdependence with the
nature of the spin-spin coupling.
Thermal
excitation
of
the
pseudo-one-
dimensional chains emerging in [6] results in
rotation
of
individual
mesospins.
This
both
excites
the
spin-spin
interactions
within
the
chains and reintroduces coupling between the
chains, significantly altering the induced inter-
action anisotropy and effectively increasing the
dimensionality of the lattice perceived by any
given spin. It is natural to ask what effect would
be seen if the second dimension of the lattice
remained inaccessible even as the mesospins
rotate due to thermal excitation. We explore an
analogue of this question in the current paper,
demonstrating that a lattice-induced interaction
anisotropy can result in a one-dimensional sys-
tem
comprising
two-dimensional
(continuous)
spins exhibiting behaviour reminiscent of inter-
acting discrete one-dimensional components. In
addition, we provide evidence that the associ-
ated model is an example of a relatively rare,
physically meaningful, one-dimensional system
with short-range interactions that can sustain
long-range order at non-zero temperatures; the
combination of lattice-induced anisotropy and
vibrationnal degree of freedom, appears to over-
come the usual restrictions preventing most such
models exhibiting a phase transition [7–10].
2
Simulations
We consider a linear chain of regularly spaced
circular mesospins; any given spin in the chain
can be considered two-dimensional and isotropic
(i.e. they are XY-like). The interactions between
such mesospins in a physical system are known to
be dominated by their stray fields, which exhibit
an emergent anisotropy arising from a combina-
tion of lattice geometry and the mesospin inter-
nal magnetic texture[5, 6]. These closely resem-
ble dipole-dipole interactions, but are sufficiently
short-ranged to allow for only nearest-neighbour
coupling to be considered significant. Due to the
combination of the effective spin type and nature
of the interactions, we refer to our model as “XY
dipole-like” or XY-DL.
We determined the DL interaction potential
using the open source micromagnetics software
Mumax3 [11] to model a pair of mesospins, each
with diameter D = 100 nm and separated by
a gap of d = 40 nm (figure 1). We take the
line through the centres of the two mesospins to
define the x-axis, with positive direction pointing
from spin 1 to spin 2. Mesospin 1 forms an angle
θ1 = [0, 2π) with the positive x direction, and sim-
ilarly for mesospin 2. The calculated potential, as
a function of the angles θ1 and θ2, is shown in the
bottom panel of figure 1.
For comparison we have also simulated two
related limiting systems: the one-dimensional XY
and one-dimensional Ising models, with nearest
neighbour exchange interactions in each case. The
corresponding Hamiltonians are:
HIsing = −J
2
X
⟨i,j⟩
sisj
(1)
with si ∈{−1, 1} and
HXY−E = −J
2
X
⟨i,j⟩
cos (θi −θj)
(2)
In both cases, the sum is over all nearest-
neighbour pairs of spins with boundary conditions
as specified below. The notation XY-E indicates
2


θ1
θ2
d
D
x
y
Fig. 1
Top) Diagram of a two-mesospin system. Bot-
tom) Normalised mesospin interaction potential of the two
spin system calculated using micromagnetics. The interac-
tion is governed by stray fields and the energy is therefore
dependant on the spins direction relative to the chains
direction, resulting in induced anisotropy.
“XY with exchange” to distinguish this from the
XY-DL model. The energy scale is defined by J,
which is set equal to 1 throughout. For ease of
comparison between these reference systems and
the XY-DL mdoel, we have scaled the DL poten-
tial so that its global maximum (in dimensionless
units) is equal to 1, i.e. the same pairwise maxi-
mum for both HIsing and HXY−E. This effectively
fixes the (unique) length of the mesospins. Tuning
of the interaction strength is physically achievable
by varying the size of the mesospins and the lattice
parameter of the chains.
The
global
rotational
symmetry
of
both
HXY−E and HIsing means that the fully aligned
spins in the ground state of the XY-E and Ising
chains have no preferred direction in space. Impor-
tantly, the ground state of each is independent
of the direction of the chain itself. One could go
further and note that these models exist indepen-
dently of the notion of any underlying physical
arrangement of the spins (lattice). By contrast
the lattice structure in the XY-DL model directly
causes the anisotropy in the interaction potential,
which in turn breaks the underlying rotational
symmetry. Spins in the ground state are con-
strained to lie along the axis defined by the spin
chain; the ground state is doubly-degenerate, due
to the fact the spins can point in either direction
along the chain, so long as they all point in the
same direction.
For all models, we used a standard Metropo-
lis Monte Carlo algorithm with 104 Monte-Carlo
steps per spin (MCS/s) for equilibration and
2 × 106 MSC/s for data collection at each tem-
perature. The system was sampled after every
Metropolis update. We simulated a range of sys-
tem sizes, with N from 10 to 10000, using both
open and periodic boundary conditions. Spin
updates were swept through the chain with a ran-
dom new angle for each spin at each Monte Carlo
step. The possible spin angles were confined to
integers (360 possible angles per spin) to coin-
cide with the grid used to calculate the potential.
Whilst this technically introduces a discontinu-
ity akin to a clock model, our tests showed no
discernible impact of varying the size of this dis-
cretization provided the number of available states
remained above a certain threshold. The order
parameter M was computed with
m =
v
u
u
t
 N
X
i=1
cos (θi)
!2
+
 N
X
i=1
sin (θi)
!2
(3)
and averaged over each Monte Carlo step
M = ⟨m⟩.
(4)
3 Results
3.1 Evidence of long-range order
The behaviour of the order parameter, M, as a
function of temperature, T is shown in figure 2 for
chains with N = 30. As expected, all three models
show evidence of order when T →0. For the XY-E
model, the magnetization decreases rapidly as T
is increased from 0, reflecting the continuous exci-
tation spectrum. There is no evident phase tran-
sition and the apparent finite M plateau at high
temperatures is a known effect of finite-size (the
remanent magnetization approaches zero as N is
increased). By contrast, the T = 0 order in the
Ising chains persists to small finite temperatures,
3


before the order parameter decreases through an
effective phase transition at T ∗, which we take
to correspond to the point of steepest descent
of M(T) (or the minimum of dM/dT – inset).
As with the XY-E model, there is a remanent
magnetization at high temperatures. This is a con-
sequence of the finite lengths of the chains in the
simulations. In the thermodynamic limit, as noted
above, there is no long-range order above T = 0.
The effect of the chain’s finite size, discussed in
more detail below, is to alter the energy/entropy
balance in the free energy. The entropic gain asso-
ciated with formation of a domain wall no-longer
outweighs the corresponding energy cost; excita-
tions gap from the ground state increases as the
chains are progressively shortened.
A key result of this paper is the plot of M(T)
for the XY-DL model in figure 2 and again for
a range of values of N in figure 4. As the tem-
perature is raised from zero, individual spins can
undergo small rotations away from the ground
state configuration with vanishingly small energy
cost as compared to flipping of a spin in an
Ising chain. The magnetization therefore shows
an immediate decrease with temperature (from
M(0)), in contrast to the finite chain Ising model
for which there is a finite region in which excita-
tions are thermally inaccessible. However, unlike
the XY-E chain, the excitation energy of a given
spin depends both on its direction relative to it
nearest neighbours and on the angle it makes with
the fixed axis defined by the underlying lattice.
This suppresses spin waves at low energy and con-
strains excitations to small fluctuations within a
largely ordered single domain for temperatures
below an effective T ∗≈0.32. Above this tem-
perature, domain walls are thermally accessible
and it is notable that the lowest-energy disorder-
inducing excitation is a domain wall between
two largely-ordered domains, rather than a long-
wavelength spin wave (figure 7).
3.2 Finite-size and boundary effects
Our simulations of both the XY-E and Ising mod-
els show the expected effects of finite size across
the full range of chain lengths studied. As the XY-
E chain is lengthened, M(T) falls more rapidly
near T = 0 and the remanent high-temperature
magnetization decreases, approaching zero in the
thermodynamic limit (figure 3). For the Ising
system, increasing the chain length leads to the
expected reduction in T ∗proportional to 1/ ln N
(figure 5). By contrast, whilst the XY-DL model
shows some evidence of finite-size effects for very
short chains, these effects not observed for chains
longer than a few hundred spins (figure 5). Beyond
this length, T ∗remains approximately constant at
around 0.32 J, and plots of M vs T are essentially
indistinguishable in the low temperature phase
for all N. Whilst Peierls’ argument remains valid
in terms of the energy/entropy balance for the
XY-DL configuration with two oppositely oriented
perfectly-ordered domains, this arrangement has
a higher overall free energy than thermally acces-
sible excitations of a single domain configuration.
The net result is a region of apparent long-range
order, undergoing a phase transition at T ∗. Figure
6 shows a comparison of this finite-size behaviour
in simulations of the XY-DL model when using
open vs periodic boundary conditions. For short
chains (N < 80) with periodic boundary con-
ditions, the finite-size effects are reminiscent of
Ising-like behaviour. As might be expected, simu-
lations using open boundaries show an increasing
influence of “looser” edge spins as the chain length
is decreased. With edge spins having just one
neighbour, they are more susceptible to thermal
fluctuations; this manifests as a reduction in the
stability of the ordered phase and an initial reduc-
tion in T ∗as we move towards shorter chain
lengths. As the chain length is further shortened,
additional finite-size effects first contribute to,
and then dominate, the ordering mechanism. The
impact of the edge spins thus diminishes and T ∗
increases.
4 Discussion
It is often assumed that one-dimensional sys-
tems with short-range interactions possess no
thermodynamically stable phase with long-range
order above T = 0 in the thermodynamic limit
N
→∞(where N is the number of spins).
In the case of continuous spins, this assertion is
generally supported by reference to the Mermin-
Wagner theorem[7], in which long-wavelength
spin waves are energetically accessible for all
non-zero temperatures for sufficiently large sys-
tems. For systems of discrete spins, the assumed
general absence of long-range order is typically
4


0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
T (J)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
M
XY-E
Ising
XY-DL
0
1
T (J)
−2
−1
0
dM/dT 
(1/J)
Fig. 2
The effect of spin dimensionality and interaction
potential on ordering of finite chains. M vs T of Ising, XY-E
and XY-DL chains at N = 30. From the derivatives (inset),
an inflection point, T ∗, can be seen in the Ising and XY-DL
chains but is absent in the XY-E chain. T ∗is also marked
with arrows on the M vs T graph.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
T
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
M
N = 10
N = 20
N = 30
0.5
1.0
1.5
T
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
dM/dT
Fig. 3
The effect of system size. M vs T of a XY-E
chain with lengths N = 10, 20, 30. The inset shows the
first derivative of the magnetisation. The order parameter,
due to the finite size of the chains, decreases immediately
and fast as T > 0. As the chains length increases, M
decreases even faster, which can be seen by the decrease in
the derivative at T →0 as N increases.
explained with reference to the heuristic argu-
ments of Peierls, famously explained by Landau
and Lifshitz, regarding the balance of energetic
and entropic contributions to the change in free
energy on formation of a domain wall. In reality
the picture is more complex and broad state-
ments regarding the absence of long-range order
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
T
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
M
N = 10
N = 160
N = 1280
N = 10000
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
T
−6
−4
−2
0
dM/dT
Fig. 4
The effect of system size. M vs T of a XY-DL
chain with lengths N = 10, 20, 160, 1280. The inset shows
the first derivative of the magnetisation. The profile at low
T appears to converge with N with T ∗≈0.32.
Fig. 5
The effect of spin dimensionality on order. T∗vs
1/ln(N) for Ising and XY-DL chains with open boundaries.
The dotted lines are fits and the shaded areas highlight the
difference in the order between the two systems.
in one-dimensional models typically assume cer-
tain (at times, unspecified) additional constraints.
For example, Mermin and Wagner were clear
that their arguments applied to isotropic contin-
uous spins – leaving the questions of whether,
and to what extent, anisotropy might facilitate
long-range order to other studies. Likewise, it has
long been established that one-dimensional sys-
tems with short-range interactions can exhibit
long-range order in the presence of external fields
or spin inhomogeneity. Cuesta and S´anchez pro-
vided a valuable addition to the literature on this
5


0.30
0.33
0.35
0.38
0.40
0.43
T
*
 (J)
20
40
80
160
1280
N           
XY
-DL PBC
XY
-DL OBC
0
0
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
1/ln(N)          
Fig. 6
The effect of open and periodic boundaries. T∗
vs 1/ln(N) for XY-DL chains with open(OBC) and peri-
odic(PBC) boundary conditions. The decrease in order due
to the edge effect is highlighted.
topic, with their development of a general theorem
for the conditions leading to the non-existence
of phase transitions in one-dimensional systems
with short-range interactions. A notable result of
their work was to highlight examples of physically
meaningful transitions in one-dimensional models
for which the conditions of their general theorem
were not met. Even for systems for which no long-
range order is strictly stable, there remains the
possibility that topological order might be viable,
perhaps most famously exemplified in two dimen-
sions by the 2dXY model, which undergoes a
Kosterlitz-Thouless-Berezinskii (KTB) transition
from a paramagnetic to a low-temperature criti-
cal phase. Such transitions are seen in a variety
of physically interesting systems, both at surfaces
and in monolayers[12], including in mesoscopic
spins.
5 Conclusion
We have shown how a realistic stray-field potential
coupling classical magnetic mesospins in a one-
dimensional chain effectively reduces the dimen-
sionality of the mesospins in the ground state, con-
straining them to lie along a lattice-defined easy
axis. This emergent effective spin anisotropy sup-
presses long-wavelength excitations to the extent
that the system can support a stable phase with
long-range order at finite temparatures. The scal-
ing of the effective transition temperature with
system size exhibits Ising like behaviour for very
Fig. 7
Domain walls calculated by relaxing a two domain
Monte Carlo simulation. The chains shown here have been
truncated from a N = 20 simulation. Top) Ising chain with
domain boundary energy cost of ∆EDW = 2J. Center)
Asymmetrical XY-DL chain with domain boundary energy
cost of ∆EDW ≈1.8J. Bottom) Symmetrical XY-DL
chain with domain boundary energy cost of ∆EDW ≈1.8J
small systems; however, it rapidly converges to
T ∗/J ≈0.32, a value that appears to be indepen-
dent of system size for all N > 80.
This result is important for two reasons.
Firstly, our model represents a rare example of
a physically meaningful one-dimensional system
with short-range interactions that can support
long-range order above T = 0. This stability arises
from the interplay of the spatial dimensionality
and inter-spin coupling, and is in stark contrast to
the behaviour observed for exchange coupled Ising
or XY spins in one or two dimensions. Secondly,
our results provide a new perspective on the ori-
gins of shape anisotropy at the mesoscopic scale.
In a physical realisation of our model, the overall
demagnetizing field of the system is not inherently
determined by any one of the spin dimensional-
ity, the lattice dimensionality, nor the inter-spin
coupling. Instead, the emergent shape anisotropy
results from the interplay between the dominant
coupling potential and spatial dimensionality of
the system. The result is a self-induced easy axis
in the constituent mesospins, significantly con-
straining the thermally accessible excitations and
dominating the equilibrium magnetic behaviour
at small finite temperatures.
We suggest that our results are immediately
applicable in the context of the design and char-
acterization of low-dimensional magnetic meta-
materials, and may have implications for the
understanding of the origins of shape anisotropy
more broadly.
6


References
[1] Leo, N. et al.
Collective magnetism in an
artificial 2d xy spin system. Nature Commu-
nications 9, 2850 (2018). URL https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-018-05216-2.
[2] ¨Ostman, E., Arnalds, U. B., Kapaklis, V.,
Taroni, A. & Hj¨orvarsson, B.
Ising-like
behaviour of mesoscopic magnetic chains.
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 30,
365301 (2018). URL https://dx.doi.org/10.
1088/1361-648X/aad0c1.
[3] Kapaklis, V. et al. Melting artificial spin ice.
New Journal of Physics 14, 035009 (2012).
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/
14/3/035009.
[4] Wang, R. F. et al. Artificial ‘spin ice’ in a
geometrically frustrated lattice of nanoscale
ferromagnetic islands.
Nature 439, 303–
306 (2006).
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature04447.
[5] Arnalds, U. B. et al.
Thermal transitions
in nano-patterned XY-magnets.
Applied
Physics Letters 105, 042409 (2014).
URL
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4891479.
[6] Strandqvist, N. et al. Emergent anisotropy
and textures in two dimensional magnetic
arrays.
Phys.
Rev.
Mater.
6,
105201
(2022).
URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevMaterials.6.105201.
[7] Mermin, N. D. & Wagner, H.
Absence
of ferromagnetism or antiferromagnetism in
one- or two-dimensional isotropic heisenberg
models.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 1133–1136
(1966).
URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevLett.17.1133.
[8] Landau, L. D. & Lifshitz, E. M. Statistical
physics Course of Theoretical Physics ; Vol-
ume 5 (Pergamon Press, Oxford, England,
1993 - 1980).
[9] Peierls, R.
On ising’s model of ferromag-
netism.
Mathematical Proceedings of the
Cambridge Philosophical Society 32, 477–481
(1936).
[10] Cuesta, J. A. & S´anchez, A. General non-
existence theorem for phase transitions in
one-dimensional systems with short range
interactions, and physical examples of such
transitions.
Journal of Statistical Physics
115, 869–893 (2004). URL https://doi.org/
10.1023/B:JOSS.0000022373.63640.4e.
[11] Vansteenkiste, A. et al.
The design and
verification of MuMax3.
AIP Advances 4,
107133 (2014).
URL https://doi.org/10.
1063/1.4899186.
[12] Taroni, A., Bramwell, S. T. & Holdsworth,
P. C. W.
Universal window for two-
dimensional critical exponents.
Journal
of Physics: Condensed Matter 20, 275233
(2008).
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/
0953-8984/20/27/275233.
7
